make the branches seem more profitable than they are . In many cases that statement -- `` We break even on our downtown operation and make money on our branches '' -- would be turned around if the cost analysis were recalculated on terms less prejudicial to the old store . Fear of the competition -- always a great motivating force in the American economy -- makes retailers who do not have suburban operations exaggerate both the volume and the profitability of their rival's shiny new branches . The fact seems to be that very many large branch stores are uneconomical , that the choice of location in the suburbs is as important as it was downtown , and that even highly suburbanized cities will support only so many big branches . Moreover , the cost of operations is always high in any new store , as the conservative bankers who act as controllers for retail giants are beginning to discover . When all has been said , however , the big branch store remains a major break with history in the development of American retailing . Just as the suburban factory may be more convenient than the downtown plant to the worker with a car , the trip to the shopping center may seem far easier than to the downtown department store , though both are the same distance from home . Indeed , there are some cities where the suburban shopping pulls customers who are geographically much nearer to downtown . Raymond Vernon reports that residents of East St. Louis have been driving across the Mississippi , through the heart of downtown St. Louis and out to the western suburbs for major shopping , simply because parking is easier at the big branches than it is in the heart of town . To the extent that the problem is merely parking , an aggressive downtown management , like that of Lazarus Brothers in Columbus , Ohio , can fight back successfully by building a garage on the lot next door . If the distant patron of the suburban branch has been frightened away from downtown by traffic problems , however , the city store can only pressure the politicians to do something about the highways or await the completion of the federal highway program . And if the affection for the suburban branch reflects a desire to shop with `` nice people '' , rather than with the indiscriminate urban mass which supports the downtown department store , the central location may be in serious trouble . Today , according to land economist Homer Hoyt , shopping centers and their associated parking lots cover some 46,000 acres of land , which is almost exactly the total land area in all the nation's Central Business Districts put together . The downtown store continues to offer the great inducement of variety , both within its gates and across the street , where other department stores are immediately convenient for the shopper who wants to see what is available before making up her mind . If anything may be predicted in the quicksilver world of retailing , it seems likely that the suburban branch will come to dominate children's clothing ( taking the kid downtown is too much of a production ) , household gadgetry and the discount business in big-ticket items . Department stores were built on dry goods , especially ladies' fashions , and in this area , in the long run , the suburban branches will be hard put to compete against downtown . If this analysis is correct , the suburban branches will turn out to be what management's cost accountants refuse to acknowledge , marginal operations rather than major factors . Historically in America the appeal of cities has been their color and life , the variety of experience they offered . `` How ya gonna keep 'em down on the farm '' ? ? Was a question that had to be asked long before they saw Paree . Though Americans usually lived in groups segregated by national origin or religious belief , they liked to work and shop in the noise and vitality of downtown . Only a radical change in the nature of the population in the central city would be likely to destroy this preference -- and we must now turn our attention to the question of whether such a change , gloomily foreseen by so many urban diagnosticians , is actually upon us . 4 . Suburbs and Negroes In their book , American Skyline , Christopher Tunnard and Henry Hope Reed argue that Franklin Roosevelt's New Deal was what made the modern suburb a possibility -- a fine ironical argument , when you consider how suburbanites tend to vote . The first superhighways -- New York's Henry Hudson and Chicago's Lake Shore , San Francisco's Bay Bridge and its approaches , a good slice of the Pennsylvania Turnpike -- were built as part of the federal works program which was going to cure the depression . At the same time , Roosevelt's Federal Housing Administration , coupled with Henry Morgenthau's cheap-money policy , permitted ordinary lower-middle-class families to build their own homes . Bankers who had been reluctant to lend without better security than the house itself got that security from the U. S. government ; ; householders who had been unable to pick up the burden of short-term high-interest mortgages found they could borrow for twenty-five years at 4 per cent , under government aegis . Before losing itself in the sands of the 19th Century , the grand stream of Italian Renaissance architectural decoration made a last appearance in the Brumidi frescos of the Capitol Rotunda in Washington . The artistic generation after Brumidi was trained in the Paris of that time to a more meticulous standard of execution , and tended to overlook greatness of conception where faults and weakness were easy to find . But it is a great conception . The open ceiling , with allegorical and classical figures thrown in masses against the sky : the closed frieze , formally divided into historical scenes and tightly tied to the stone walls , belong in their large ordering to the line of Correggio and his Baroque followers . The descent may be remote , but this is surely the only full-scale example of that vigorous inheritance in the United States . Constantino Brumidi designed the decorative scheme as a whole , in collaboration with the architect Charles U. Walter , at the time when plans were being made to replace the wooden dome of Bullfinch with the present much larger iron structure . After many years and many interruptions he was able to finish the canopy fresco , and slightly less than half the frieze , beginning with the Liberty group opposite the East door , and ending with William Penn , all but one leg , when a tragic accident ended his career . He left at his death sketches , drawn to scale , for the rest of the circle . These were carried out not too faithfully by Filippo Costaggini , who began by supplying the missing member to the founder of Pennsylvania and noting in pencil , in Italian , that he `` began at this point '' . When Costaggini had used up all the sketches thirty-six feet of empty frieze were left over . A blank undecorated void , plastered in roughcast , disfigured the wall of the Rotunda until 1951 . Then , advised by the Architect of the Capitol , the Joint Committee for the Library , traditionally responsible for the works of art in the building , ordered the space cleared and painted in fresco , to show `` the Peace after the Civil War '' , `` the Spanish-American War '' , and `` the Birth of Aviation '' , to match as nearly as feasible Brumidi's technique and composition . Later the cleaning and restoration were ordered , first of the older part of the frieze , finally of the canopy . What follows is therefore a description of three separate undertakings , the new frescoing of the gap , and the successive essays in conservation , with some discussion of problems that arose in connection with each . For the use of students and future restorers , a full , day-by-day record was kept of all three undertakings , complete technical reports on what we found and what we did . These may be consulted in the office of the Architect of the Capitol , or the Library of Congress . The first preliminary was inspecting the unfinished length of frieze , a jumble of roughcast and finish coats , all in bad condition . It was decided to strip the whole area down to the bricks , and to replace the rough coats up to one inch thickness to agree with the older artists' preparation , with a mortar , one part slaked lime , three parts sand , to be put on in two layers . Cartoons were drawn full size , after sketches had been made to satisfy all the authorities . There was some difficulty here . One had to manage the given subjects , three diverse recent events , so as to make them part of a classical frieze , -- that is , a pattern of large figures filling the space , with not much else , against a blank background . Moreover , all three representations must be squeezed comfortably into little more than the length Brumidi allowed for each one of his . When it was all arranged to fit , and not to interrupt the lengthwise flow of movement in the frieze , the cartoons were tried in place . The scaffolding , a confusion of heavy beams hanging from the gallery above , was strong and safe , but obscured visibility . Nothing could be seen from the floor , but by moving around the gallery one could get glimpses ; ; and we were able to decide on some amplification of scale . To be sure of matching color as well as form , pieces of cartoon were traced on the roughcast , and large samples painted in fresco , then left two months to dry out to their final key . Later it was gratifying to note that they had set so solidly as to be hard to remove when the time came . The scaffold was the length of the space to be painted . What bits of Brumidi and Costaggini could be reached at either end seemed in good order , though the roughish sandy surface was thick with dust . Washed , they came out surprisingly clear and bright . It could be seen that both artists used a very thick final coat of plaster , one half inch , and that both followed the traditional Italian fresco technique as described by Cennino Cennini in the 14th Century , and current in Italy to this day . That is , they used opaque color throughout , getting solid highlights with active lime white . Painting `` a secco '' is much in evidence . A brown hatching reinforces and broadens shadows , and much of the background is solidly covered with a dark coat . This brown is sometimes so rich in medium as to appear to be oil paint . In our own practice , to have the last `` intonaco '' plaster coat thick enough to match , and at the same time to avoid fine cracks in drying , we found that it had to be put on in two layers , letting the first set awhile before applying the second . The mortar was three parts sand to two of lime . Some of the lime that is always on hand in the Capitol basement for plaster repairs was slaked several months for us ; ; but to make it stiffer , of a really putty-like consistency to avoid cracking , we added a little hydrated lime -- hard on the hands , but we could see no other disadvantage . I am told that a mortar longer slaked might have remained longer in condition for painting . As it was , it took the pigment well for six hours , enough for our purpose , and held it firmly in setting . It was obvious that to match Brumidi , white must be mixed with all but the darkest tones . Lime white , hard and brilliant , has a tendency to `` jump '' away from the other colors in drying , and also by its capacity to set , to preclude the use of ready-made gradations , so useful in decorative work . In older Italian practice , lime , dried and reground `` bianco sangiovanni '' , entered into such prepared shades . For convenience we chose a stronger pigment , unknown to the early Italians or to Brumidi , titanium oxide , reserving the active lime white for highest lights , put on at the end of the day's stint . Other pigments were mostly raw umber , some burnt umber , and a little yellow ochre . This last was probably not in Brumidi's palette , but was needed to take the chill , bluish look off the new work next to the old , where softening effects of time were seen , even after thorough cleaning . The use of `` secco '' we tried to restrict to covering joints . Experience showed , however , that it is very difficult to paint a dark umber background in fresco that will not dry out spotty and uneven . Later Brumidi and Costaggini will be seen coping with this same problem . We were forced , as they were , to work a good deal of tempera into background and dark areas . We made it by Doerner's recipe , five parts thoroughly washed cheese curd to one of lime putty ; ; ground together they made a strong adhesive , which became waterproof in drying . Figure 1 was taken in 1953 . The new part is finished . On the right is the Brumidi Liberty group , as it looked after cleaning operations , which had not yet come around to the other end ; ; where , of Costaggini , only some foliage has been washed , at the point where his work stopped . One is led to speculate as to why the empty space was there , left for our century to finish . Costaggini said it was Brumidi's fault in not providing enough material to fill the circle . Brumidi's son later maintained that Costaggini had compressed and mutilated his father's designs , ambitiously coveting a bit he could claim for his very own . This question might be settled by comparing the measurement of the actual circumference with the dimensions noted , presumably in Brumidi's hand , above the various sections of his long preparatory drawing , which has been kept . Whosever fault , it is evident that Brumidi intended to fill out the whole frieze with his `` histories '' and come full circle with the scene of the discovery of California gold . In painting a fresco , the handling of wet mortar compels one always to move from top to bottom and from left to right , not to spoil yesterday's work with today's plastering . At the very first , then , Brumidi was required , by the classically pyramidal shape of his central group , to fill in the triangular space above the seated girl on Liberty's right , before starting on the allegorical figures themselves . Here he put a small man , whose missing hands might have left his function doubtful , until comparison with the first sketches showed that when the artist came back to the beginning , this was to be the closing figure of the party of `` forty-niners '' , and was to hold a basket . One sees Costaggini's rendering of the same figure more than thirty feet away . The photograph , Figure 1 of the completed frieze , shows how , having been separated from his fellows in useless isolation for eighty years , he has now been given a hand , and by juxtaposition ( and the permission of the Committee ) , given a new job , to represent the witnesses of the first flight at Kitty Hawk in 1903 . The startlingly bright effect of the first washings led the Committee to order the rest of the Brumidi-Costaggini cycle cleaned and restored to go with them . The fixed wooden scaffold was removed , and , so as to reach all the frieze , one of pipe , on wheels , built up from the floor . Every few days , in the early morning , as the work progressed , twenty men would appear to push it ahead and to shift the plank foundation that distributed its weight widely on the Rotunda pavement , supported as it is by ancient brick vaulting . On this giddy and oscillating platform over fifty feet from the floor , after a first dusting , we began to wash . A most useful tool for wetting the surface without running down was made from a greenhouse `` mist spray '' nozzle welded to a hose connection , to be used at low water pressure . A valve in the handle let us cut the pressure still lower . One man sprayed , with a sponge in hand to check excess wetting . A second assistant mopped with two sponges . In parts a repeated sponging was needed , but everywhere we found that water alone was enough to restore the original brightness . No soap or other cleaning agent was used that might bring in unwanted chemical reactions . The painting `` a fresco '' stood up superbly ; ; a little of the `` secco '' came off . Necessary retouching was put on at once . Altogether we found the craftsmanship first rate , especially Brumidi's . We were greatly helped by there being no traces of former restoring . Apparently not more than dusting had ever been done , and not much of that . The plaster was sound , the intonaco firmly attached all over , and the pigment solidly incorporated with it in all but a few unimportant places . The greatest source of trouble was rain which had repeatedly flowed from openings above , soaking the surface and leaving streaks of dissolved lime , very conspicuous even after cleaning , particularly in the `` Landing of Columbus '' , `` Oglethorpe and the Indians '' , and `` Yorktown '' . Here the Architect , referring to the use of the Capitol as a public building , not a museum , requested some repainting to maintain decorative effect , rather than leaving blank , unsightly patches . These frescos have had no care for eighty years . With naked gas jets below and leaky windows above , enough to ruin wall paintings in any medium , they have survived , in a building long unheated in winter , hot and damp under the iron dome in summer . Those whom I wish to address with this letter are for the most part unknown to me . It may well be that , when Rudy Pozzatti and I visited your country last spring , you were living and working close to the places we saw and the streets we walked . As American artists , it was natural that we would want to meet as many Soviet artists as possible . This letter might not have been necessary had our efforts to meet and talk with you been more successful . Even though we did not see many of your faces , it appears now quite evident that a considerable number of your profession heard , from those whom we had the fortune to encounter , that we had been in your midst . I am very pleased that quite a number of you found ways to communicate to me your desire to hear of our reactions and experiences in the U.S.S.R. . I can well understand your curiosity . We , ourselves , are always eager to know how others feel about us and the way in which we live . It is my hope that this written message and report will reach you through the good offices of the Union of Soviet Artists . There should be no reason to misinterpret or ignore the intent of this letter . Pozzatti and I endeavored earnestly to record our impressions without the prejudice that the anxiety of our time so easily provokes . The time-span of little more than a month cannot entitle me to pose as an expert on anything I saw . Too much damage is done by `` experts '' who have spent even less time , if any at all , in the U.S.S.R. . Nevertheless I consider it reasonable , because of my commitment as an artist , to assume that the rights and responsibilities of creative individuals are related to humanity as a whole rather than to specific geo-political interests . If this attitude is seriously questioned in the Soviet Union , it does not necessarily follow that the majority of the society in which I live is too aware of the necessity for clarity on this ethical as well as aesthetic point of view . It is a matter of some disappointment to me that still many of my own countrymen are too shortsighted to ascribe any symbolic significance to the plight of a minority , such as artists , in any social order . I encountered many questions and great interest upon my return from the Soviet Union about my reactions to that experience . That which I found most profound and most disturbing appeared to evoke a curiously muted reaction . Almost as if I were talking about something quite unreal . Apparently this is not the time and the climate in which people will listen objectively , or at least dispassionately , to individual impressions of a subject which preoccupies a good deal of their waking moments . Personal predispositions tend to blunt the ear and , in turn , the voice as well . I cannot be content with the anecdotal small talk of a somewhat unusual travelogue . I am equally impatient with the shrug of the shoulder , shake of the head of those who no longer care because they have known it for so long ; ; the aggressive disbelief of those who are romantically lost in a semantic jungle of the word `` Revolution '' ; ; the belligerent denunciations by the sick fanatics of ignorance who try to build a papier-mache wall of pseudo-patriotism on our physical horizons . Difficult as it may have been at times , Pozzatti and I saw enough , talked to enough artists , historians and others to realize that the issue is quite clear . Artists and poets are the raw nerve-ends of humanity ; ; they are small in number and their contribution is not immediately decisive in everyday life . By themselves they may not be able to save the life on this planet , but without them there would be very little left worth saving . It cannot be said that our very first day in the Soviet Union turned out to be an ordinary one . On that cold , but bright , April day we were guests of your government in the reviewing stand of Red Square to witness the poeple's celebration for Yuri Gagarin and later on that day we attended the somewhat more exclusive reception for him in one of the impressive palaces of the Kremlin . If we thus spent our very first day in the midst of a large number of your people honoring a new hero and a great national achievement , our last day , to us at least , was equally impressive and very moving , even though the crowds were absent and there was almost complete silence . We stood under a gigantic tree in the rolling country just outside of Moscow looking at silent flowers on the grave of a Russian poet and writer who cherished the love for his country to the point of foregoing the highest international honor . The grave , about half-way between his home and the blue turrets of a small church , rose above the forms and spaces of gently undisciplined pastures of green , the sounds of birds , the silence of other graves and the casual paths through small forests . Just yesterday we had met and talked with a living writer , a contemporary of the dead poet , who is known for his ability of manipulating his ideas and his craft more advantageously . But today we were aware of only two men . One had taken a flight into uncharted space , in the service of science , to return as a living hero . The other had assumed the right to explore the equally uncharted space of the human spirit . The flowers on his grave attested to the fact that he as well was somebody's hero . These two recollections form the frame around a series of experiences and sights which , to me at least , symbolize the extremes in the aesthetic as well as ethical conflict between materialism and humanism . A struggle that is being waged all over the world in the half-light of disinterest . The prevalent opinion which we encountered in a variety of expressions in your country denied not only the existence of this conflict but it was elaborated even further with an incredible semantic dexterity . The socialist environment , it was stated , had cross-fertilized these two extreme seeds and was about to produce a new plant and fruit . When I speculated on one such occasion that the new growth , like other mutations , might be unable to propagate , I was immediately accused of preaching racial prejudice . I could not bring myself to answer that `` some of my best friends are non-propagating mules '' . This kind of reasoning and logic takes a little time to get used to . After a while we were perhaps less surprised , but still puzzled , when a friendly discussion would suddenly jump the track into the most irrelevant and illogical comparisons . A chance remark about Lenin's sealed train brought the rejoinder that this was a myth akin to George Washington's cherry tree . Theories of the behavior pattern of population masses were compared to scientific discoveries concerning the motion-pattern of gaseous masses . No wonder that Pozzatti and I had at times difficulty in remembering the real purpose of our presence , namely , Cultural Exchange . Typical of such an experience was the occasion of a somewhat formal official welcome in the offices of the Union of Soviet Artists . We had looked forward to what we hoped to be our first informal meeting with a number of Moscow's artists . Instead , we became involved in a series of friendly , but overly formal , welcoming addresses to which we had no choice but to reply in kind . The terms of friendship , understanding , cooperation , etc. , tend to become somewhat shopworn because of constant and indiscriminate use . I can only hope that the continuing exchange of groups and individuals between our countries will not wear out all language pertinent to the occasion . The presiding female functionary , of massive proportions and forbidding appearance , initially did not contribute to the expressions of friendship and welcome by a number of dignified gentlemen representing the arts . It was only after we had responded , with what I fear were similar cliches , that she went into action by questioning our desire for friendship and understanding with a challenge about aggressive and warlike actions by the U.S. Government in Cuba and Laos . She retreated by leaving the room when we suggested that our meeting might well terminate right then and there . Unfortunately she returned later , just as I had taken advantage of the friendlier atmosphere in the room by stating that perhaps an unexpected result of the Cultural Exchange Program would be the re-emergence of Abstract Art in Russia , with Social Realism regaining dominance in the U.S. . This gave her an opportunity to ring down the curtain with the petulant admonition that we should not presume to lecture her on Abstraction . She did not go so far as to say , as was done on other occasions , that Abstraction as well as Impressionism were a Russian invention that had been discarded as unwanted by the people of the U.S.S.R. . Pozzatti and I could not know then that we would experience this sort of treatment more often in Moscow than elsewhere . We were to discover , in fact , that quite a number of people share with us the impression that , in contrast to other Soviet regions , Moscow's atmosphere is depressingly subdued and official . To have one's intentions deliberately or unintentionally misunderstood is always a waste of time . Until our Moscow experience , I had not considered it necessary to prepare any argument formally or informally . Artists simply do not talk to each other in that fashion ; ; and , furthermore , I could not presume the implication that I spoke for American artists as a group . To save time , some clarification seemed necessary . The following is a statement read to a large and friendly group of your fellow artists in Leningrad : `` We have come to your land with the express intention of understanding and respecting your ideas and your ways . Our presence here should also be considered further , sincere evidence of the attempts by our people and their chosen government to seek any and all possible ways to effect closer , peaceful ties among all people . We are quite convinced that one of the main hopes for the future depends upon the informal contacts and exchanges of ideas between individuals . In spite of the relatively short period of time that we have experienced among you , we have already seen many indications of your character and spirit . We are acutely aware that yours is a society which , in spite of several wars and many privations , has developed itself into one of the foremost nations of the world . Your past history is resplendent with the fruits of the intellect . Your present history is equally admirable for its industrial and scientific achievements . We have come to you to experience something of your way of life while also attempting to acquaint you with that of ours . While we , as American artists , believe deeply in the universal character of all intellectual activity , we would be less than honest with you , or ourselves , if we failed to state a specific attitude toward our own society as well as the international community as a whole . In stating this position , we should like to make it clear to you that we cannot expect artists and intellectuals in other lands to share our opinion in every respect . As a matter of fact , we prize the diversity among our own people so much that we will not presume to speak for all other American artists . But certainly , all will agree that it is not so much the knowledge and search for similarities between you and us , but rather the thoughtful exploration and acceptance of our differences which may lead us to our respective and desired goals with a minimum of misunderstanding . Like yourselves , we have pride and love for our country . To many of us , this is a land to which we or our parents fled from totalitarian terror in order to live in dignified freedom . As artists we feel the same obligation , as do other individuals , in considering ourselves responsible citizens of a great nation . The Sane Society is an ambitious work . Its scope is as broad as the question : What does it mean to live in modern society ? ? A work so broad , even when it is directed by a leading idea and informed by a moral vision , must necessarily `` fail '' . Even a hasty reader will easily find in it numerous blind spots , errors of fact and argument , important exclusions , areas of ignorance and prejudice , undue emphases on trivia , examples of broad positions supported by flimsy evidence , and the like . Such books are easy prey for critics . Nor need the critic be captious . A careful and orderly man , who values precision and a kind of tough intellectual responsibility , might easily be put off by such a book . It is a simple matter , for one so disposed , to take a work like The Sane Society and shred it into odds and ends . The thing can be made to look like the cluttered attic of a large and vigorous family -- a motley jumble of discarded objects , some outworn and some that were never useful , some once whole and bright but now chipped and tarnished , some odd pieces whose history no one remembers , here and there a gem , everything fascinating because it suggests some part of the human condition -- the whole adding up to nothing more than a glimpse into the disorderly history of the makers and users . That could be easily done , but there is little reason in it . It would come down to saying that Fromm paints with a broad brush , and that , after all , is not a conclusion one must work toward but an impression he has from the outset . I mention these features of the book because they are inherent in the book's character and therefore must be mentioned . It would be superfluous to build a critique around them . There are more substantial criticisms to be made of Fromm's account of capitalist civilization . It is worthwhile to recall that Fromm's treatment has both descriptive and normative aspects . Since I have already discussed his moral position , that discussion is incorporated by reference into the following pages , which will focus on the empirical and analytic side of Fromm's treatment . I shall first indicate a couple of weaknesses in Fromm's analysis , then argue that , granted these weaknesses , he still has much left that is valuable , and , finally , raise the general question of a philosophical versus a sociological approach to the question of alienation . Almost no empirical work has been done on the problem of alienation . Despite its rather long intellectual history , alienation is still a promising hypothesis and not a verified theory . The idea has received much attention in philosophy , in literature , and in a few works of general social criticism , such as The Sane Society . What is missing is work that would answer , presumably by the use of survey methods and Guttman-type attitude scales , such questions as these : What are the components of the feeling-state described as alienation ? ? How widespread is alienation ? ? What is its incidence among the various classes and subgroups of the population ? ? Taking alienation as a dependent variable , with what socio-structural factors is it most highly associated ? ? Considered as an independent variable , how does it affect behavior in various sectors of life ? ? Until such work is done , there must remain the nagging suspicion that alienation may be little more than an expression of the malaise of the intellectual , who , rejected by and in turn rejecting the larger society , projects his own fear and despair onto the broader social screen . I am not suggesting that Fromm ought to do this kind of work . Nor do I think that alienation is nothing more than a projection of the malaise of the intellectual . I am saying only that until a fuller and different kind of evidence comes in , any discussion of alienation must be understood to have certain important limitations . Until such evidence appears , we must make do with the evidence we have . Here , perhaps , Fromm is vulnerable , for he does not always use the best and most recent evidence available , and he sometimes selects and interprets the evidence in rather special ways . Three examples follow . Fromm's analysis of alienation in the sphere of production centers around the concepts of the bureaucratization of the corporation , the separation of ownership from control , and the broad ( and thus from the point of view of corporate control , ineffective ) dispersion of stock ownership . For all these points he relies exclusively on Berle and Means's study of 1932 , The Modern Corporation And Private Property . The broad conclusions of that pioneering work remain undisturbed , but subsequent research has expanded and somewhat altered their empirical support , has suggested important revisions in the general analytic frame of reference , and has sharpened the meaning of particular analytic concepts in this area . Fromm seems unaware of these developments . Another example is his very infrequent use of the large amount of data from surveys designed to discover what and how people actually do feel and think on a broad range of topics : he cites such survey-type findings just three times . Moreover , the conclusions he draws from the findings are not always the only ones possible . For example , he cites the following data from two studies on job satisfaction : in the first study , 85 per cent of professionals and executives , 64 per cent of white collar people , and 41 per cent of factory workers expressed satisfaction with their jobs ; ; in the second study , the percentages were 86 for professionals , 74 for managerial persons , 42 for commercial employees , 56 for skilled workers , and 48 for semi-skilled workers . He concludes that these data show a `` remarkably high '' percentage of consciously dissatisfied and unhappy persons among factory and clerical workers . Starting from other value premises than Fromm's , some analysts might conclude that the percentages really tell us very little at all , while others might even conclude that the figures are remarkably low . Eric Hoffer , for example , once said that America was a paradise -- the only one in the history of the world -- for workingmen and small children . What matters is that while Fromm's reading of the data is not the only one possible , it is precisely the one we would expect from a writer who earnestly believes that every man can and ought to be happy and satisfied . Fromm also cites a poll on attitudes toward work restriction conducted by the Opinion Research Corporation in 1945 , in which 49 per cent of manual workers said a man ought to turn out as much as he could in a day's work , while 41 per cent said he should not do his best but should turn out only the average amount . Fromm says these data show that job dissatisfaction and resentment are widespread . That is one way to read the findings , but again there are other ways . One might use such findings to indicate the strength of informal primary associations in the factory , an interpretation which would run counter to Fromm's theory of alienation . Or , he might remind Fromm that the 41 per cent figure is really astonishingly low : after all , the medieval guild system was dedicated to the proposition that 100 per cent of the workers ought to turn out only the average amount ; ; and today's trade unions announce pretty much the same view . In view of these shortcomings in both the amount and the interpretation of survey-type findings on public opinion , and considering the criticisms which can be brought against Fromm's philosophical anthropology , such a passage as the following cannot be taken seriously . `` Are people happy , are they as satisfied , unconsciously , as they believe themselves to be ? ? Considering the nature of man , and the conditions for happiness , this can hardly be so '' . The ambiguities suggested above stem from a more basic difficulty in Fromm's style of thought . He seems to use the term alienation in two different ways . Sometimes he uses it as a subjective , descriptive term , and sometimes as an objective , diagnostic one . That is , sometimes it is used to describe felt human misery , and other times it is postulated to explain unfelt anxiety and discontent . The failure to keep these two usages distinct presents hazards to the reader . It also permits Fromm to do some dubious things with empirical findings . When alienation is used as an objective and diagnostic category , for example , it becomes clear that Fromm would have to say that awareness of alienation goes far toward conquering it . ( He , in effect , does say this in his discussion of the pseudo-happiness of the automaton conformist . ) Starting from this , and accepting his estimate of the iniquities of modern society , it would follow that the really disturbing evidence of alienation would be that of a work-satisfaction survey which reported widespread , stated worker satisfaction , rather than widespread , stated worker dissatisfaction . The point is that in a system such as Fromm's which recognizes unconscious motivations , and which rests on certain ethical absolutes , empirical data can be used to support whatever proposition the writer is urging at the moment . Thus , in the example cited above Fromm rests his whole case on the premise that the workers are being deprived unconsciously , unknowingly , of fulfillment , and then supports this with survey data reporting conscious , experienced frustrations . He has his cake and eats it too : if the workers say they are dissatisfied , this shows conscious alienation ; ; if they say they are satisfied , this shows unconscious alienation . This sort of manipulation is especially troublesome in Fromm's work because , although his system is derived largely from certain philosophic convictions , he asserts that it is based on empirical findings drawn both from social science and from his own consulting room . While the `` empirical psychoanalytic '' label which Fromm claims sheds no light on the validity of his underlying philosophy , it does increase the marketability of his product . The final example of the failure to use available evidence , though evidence of a different kind from that which has so far been considered , comes from Fromm's treatment of some other writers who have dealt with the same themes . In a brief chapter dealing with `` Various Other Diagnoses '' , he quotes isolated passages from some writers whose views seem to corroborate his own , and finds it `` most remarkable that a critical view of twentieth-century society was already held by a number of thinkers living in the nineteenth . '' He finds it equally `` remarkable that their critical diagnosis and prognosis should have so much in common among themselves and with the critics of the twentieth century '' . There is nothing remarkable about this at all . It is largely a matter of finding passages that suit one's purposes . There is a difference between evidence and illustration , and Fromm's citation of the other diagnosticians fits the latter category . Glance at the list : Burckhardt , Tolstoy , Proudhon , Thoreau , London , Marx , Tawney , Mayo , Durkheim , Tannenbaum , Mumford , A. R. Heron , Huxley , Schweitzer , and Einstein . This is a delightfully motley collection . One can make them say the same thing only by not listening to them very carefully and hearing only what one wants to hear . The method of selection Fromm uses achieves exactly that . Furthermore , the list is interesting for its omissions . It omits , for example , practically the whole line of great nineteenth century English social critics , nearly all the great writers whose basic position is religious , and all those who are with more or less accuracy called Existentialists . Of course , the list also excludes all writers who are fairly `` optimistic '' about the modern situation ; ; these , almost by definition , are spokesmen for an alienated ideology . It is not hard to find that concurrence of opinion which Fromm finds so remarkable when you ignore all who hold a different opinion . Turning from these problems of the use of evidence , one meets another type of difficulty in Fromm's analysis , which is his loose and ambiguous use of certain important terms . One such instance has already been presented : his use of alienation . The only other one I shall mention here is his use of the term capitalism . For Fromm , capitalism is the enemy , the root of all evil . It is of course useful to have a sovereign cause on one's social criticism , for it makes diagnosis and prescription much easier than they might otherwise be . If one characteristic distinguishes Boris Godunov , it is the consistency with which every person on the stage -- including the chorus -- comes alive in the music . Much of this lifelike quality results from Mussorgsky's care in basing his vocal line on natural speech inflections . In this he followed a path that led back to the very source of opera ; ; such composers as Monteverdi , Lully and Purcell , with the same goal in mind , had developed styles of recitative sensitively attuned to their own languages . Through long experimentation in his songs , Mussorgsky developed a Russian recitative as different from others as the language itself . Giving most of his musical continuity to the orchestra , he lets the speech fall into place as if by coincidence , but controlling the pace and emphasis of the words . The moments of sung melody , in the usual sense , come most often when the character is actually supposed to be singing , as in folk songs and liturgical chants . Otherwise Mussorgsky reserves his vocal melodies for prolonged expressions of emotion -- Boris' first monologue , for example . Even then , the flexibility of the phrasing suggests that the word comes first in importance . Aside from Boris himself , one need but examine the secondary roles to place Mussorgsky among the masters of musical portraiture . Even those who appear in only one or two scenes are full personalities , defined with economical precision . Consider the four monks who figure prominently in the action : Pimen , Varlaam , Missail and the Jesuit Rangoni . Under no circumstances could we mistake one for the other ; ; each musical setting has an individual touch . Pimen is an old man , weak in body -- his voice rarely rises to a full forte -- but firm and clear of mind . His calmness offers contrast to Grigori's youthful excitement . A quiet but sturdy theme , somewhat folklike in character , appears whenever the old monk speaks of the history he is recording or of his own past life : This theme comes to represent the outer world , the realm of battles and banquets -- seen from a distance , quite distinct from the quieter spiritual life in the monastery . It changes and develops according to the text ; ; it introduces Pimen when he comes before Boris in the last act . Once he has been identified , however , a new melody is used to accompany his narrative , a bleak motif with barren octaves creating a rather ancient effect : An imaginative storyteller , Pimen takes on the character he describes , as if he were experiencing the old shepherd's blindness and miraculous cure . Here the composer uses a favorite device of his , the intensification of the mood through key relationships . The original D minor seems to symbolize blindness , inescapable in spite of all attempts to move away from it . As the child addresses the shepherd in a dream , light -- in the form of the major mode -- begins to appear , and at the moment of the miracle we hear a clear and shining D major . Varlaam and Missail always appear together and often sing together , in a straightforward , rhythmically vigorous idiom that distinguishes them from the more subtle and well-educated Pimen . Their begging song might easily be a folk melody : The same could be said for the song to which they make their entrance in the final scene . Apparently their origin is humble , their approach to life direct and unsophisticated . Whatever learning they may have had in their order doesn't disturb them now . Missail is the straight man , not very talkative , mild-mannered when he does speak . Varlaam is loud , rowdy , uninhibited in his pleasures and impatient with anyone who is not the same . A rough ostinato figure , heard first in the introduction to the inn scene , characterizes him amusingly and reappears whenever he comes into the action : The Song Of Kazan , in which this figure becomes a wild-sounding accompaniment , fills in the picture of undisciplined high spirits . The phrasing is irregular , and the abrupt key changes have a primitive forcefulness . ( We can imagine how they startled audiences of the 1870's . ) Varlaam's music begins to ramble as he feels the effects of the wine , but he pulls himself together when the need arises . Both monks respond to the guard's challenge with a few phrases of their begging song ; ; a clever naturalistic touch is Varlaam's labored reading of the warrant . As the knack gradually comes back to him , his rhythm becomes steadier , with the rigid monotony of an unskilled reader . For the only time in the opera , words are not set according to their natural inflection ; ; to do so would have spoiled the dramatic point of the scene . Musically and dramatically , Rangoni is as far removed from the conventional monk as Varlaam . His music shows a sensuality coupled with an eerie quality that suggest somehow a blood-kinship with Dappertutto in Offenbach's Hoffman . His speech shows none of the native accent of the Russian characters ; ; in spite of the Italian name , he sounds French . His personality appears more striking by contrast with Marina , who is -- perhaps purposely -- rather superficially characterized . Rangoni's first entrance is a musical shock , a sudden open fifth in a key totally unrelated to what has preceded it . The effect is as if he had materialized out of nowhere . He speaks quietly , concealing his authority beneath a smooth humility , just as the shifting harmonies that accompany him all but hide the firm pedal point beneath them . He addresses Marina with great deference , calling her `` Princess '' at first ; ; it is only after he has involved her emotions in his scheme that he uses her given name , placing himself by implication in the position of a solicitous father . Curiously , this scene is a close parallel to one that Verdi was writing at the same time , the scene between Amonasro and Aida . Rangoni and Amonasro have the same purpose -- forcing the girl to charm the man she loves into serving her country's cause -- and their tactics are much the same . Rangoni begins by describing the sad state of the Church ; ; this brings a reaction of distress from Marina . The music becomes ethereal as he calls up a vision of her own sainthood : it is she , he tells her , who can bring the truth to Russia and convert the heretics . As if in a trance , she repeats his words -- then realizes , with a shock , her own audacity . This is no assignment for a frivolous girl , she assures him . Now Rangoni comes to the point , and we hear , for the first time , a long , downward chromatic scale that will become the characteristic motif of his sinister power . It is a phrase as arresting as a magician's gesture , with a piquant turn of harmony giving an effect of strangeness . Another theme , sinuously chromatic , appears as he directs her to gain power over Grigori by any means , even at the cost of her honor . Coming from a priest , the music sounds as odd as the advice : Marina rebels at this suggestion . Her pride is as much at stake as her virtue ; ; she is the unattainable beauty , the princess who turns away suitors by the dozen . Indignantly she denounces Rangoni for his evil thoughts and orders him to leave her . At once the Jesuit pulls out all the stops . To music of a menacing darkness , he describes the powers of Satan gaining control of the girl , poisoning her soul with pride and destroying her beauty . The combined threat of hell-fire and ugliness is too much for her , and she falls terrified at his feet . With another sudden change of mood , he is again calm and protective , exhorting her to trust and obey him as God's spokesman -- and the chromatic scale descends in ominous contradiction . Whatever the source of Rangoni's power , Marina is his captive now ; ; we are reminded of this at the end of the next scene , when his theme cuts through the warmth of the love duet , again throwing a chill over the atmosphere . The most unusual feature of Boris , however , is the use of the greatest character of all , the chorus . This is the real protagonist of the drama ; ; the conflict is not Boris versus Grigori or Shuiski or even the ghost of the murdered child , but Boris versus the Russian people . Mussorgsky makes this quite clear by the extent to which choral scenes propel the action . Boris' first entrance seems almost a footnote to the splendor of the Coronation Scene , with its dazzling confusion of tonalities . We have a brief glimpse of the Tsar's public personality , the `` official Boris '' , but our real focus is on the excitement of the crowd -- a significant contrast with its halfhearted acclamation in the opening scene , its bitter resentment and fury in the final act . One reason for the unique vitality of the chorus is its great variety in expression . It rarely speaks as a unit . Even in its most conventional appearance , the guests' song of praise to Marina , there are a few female dissenters criticizing the princess for her coldness . In many passages -- for example , the council of boyars -- each section of the chorus becomes a character group with a particular opinion . Hot arguments arise between tenors and basses , who will sing in harmony only when they agree on an idea . The opening scene shows this method at its most individual . Mussorgsky paints a telling picture of the common people , those who must suffer the effects of their rulers' struggle for power without understanding the causes . They are held in control by force , but barely . They will kneel and plead for Boris' leadership in a strangely intense song , its phrases irregularly broken as if gasping for breath , but when the police with their cudgels move away , they mock and grumble and fight among themselves . There is a quick change from the plaintive song to a conversational tone . `` Hey , Mityukh '' , asks one group , `` what are we shouting about '' ? ? And Mityukh , apparently the intellectual leader of the crowd , replies that he has no notion . The jokes and arguments grow louder until the police return ; ; then the people strike up their song with even more fervor than before , ending it with a wail of despair . Mussorgsky frequently uses liturgical music with considerable dramatic force . In Pimen's cell the soft prayers of the monks , heard from offstage , not only help to set the scene but emphasize the contrast between young Grigori's thoughts and his situation . This is especially striking between Pimen's quiet exit and Grigori's vehement outburst against Boris . Again , as Boris feels himself nearing death , a procession files into the hall singing a hymn , its modal harmonies adding a churchly touch to the grim atmosphere : The words are hardly calculated to put the Tsar's mind at ease . They echo the words with which he has described his own vision of the dying child who `` trembles and begs for mercy -- and there is no mercy '' . The living as well as the dead now accuse him ; ; this final reminder of his guilt is the fatal one . One of the outstanding assets of the present production is the restoration of the St. Basil's scene , usually omitted from performances and rarely included in a published score . Though brief , it has a sharp dramatic edge and great poignancy . In addition , it is an important link in the plot , giving us a revealing glimpse of the people's attitude toward Boris and the false Dimitri . The mayhem in the forest of Kromy is a natural sequel . The St. Basil's scene opens with little groups of beggars milling around the square , the ever present police keeping them under scrutiny . In the orchestra we hear first a hushed , hesitant pizzicato figure , then the insistent `` police '' motif as it appeared in the opening scene . The service is over , and a number of people come from the church with their spokesman Mityukh in the lead . They bring the news that the Pretender has been excommunicated ; ; this is met with scorn by the hearers , who claim that Mityukh is lying or drunk . ( Mussorgsky cleverly contrasts the two groups by their orchestral accompaniment , solemn chords or mocking staccatos . ) There is still more news , Mityukh announces : they have prayed for the soul of the Tsarevich . So far these remarks , like most criticisms of Hardy , have tacitly assumed that his poetry is all of a piece , one solid mass of verse expressing a sensibility at a single stage of development . For critics , Hardy has had no poetic periods -- one does not speak of early Hardy or late Hardy , or of the London or Max Gate period , but simply of Hardy , as of a poetic monolith . This seems odd when one recalls that he wrote poetry longer than any other major English poet : `` Domicilium '' is dated `` between 1857 and 1860 '' ; ; `` Seeing The Moon Rise '' is dated August , 1927 . One might expect that in a poetic career of seventy-odd years , some changes in style and method would have occurred , some development taken place . This is not , however , the case , and development is a term which we can apply to Hardy only in a very limited sense . In a time when poetic style , and poetic belief as well , seem in a state of continual flux , Hardy stands out as a poet of almost perverse consistency . Though he struggled with philosophy all his life , he never got much beyond the pessimism of his twenties ; ; the `` sober opinion '' of his letter to Noyes , written when Hardy was eighty years old , is essentially that of his first `` philosophical '' notebook entry , made when he was twenty-five : `` The world does not despise us : it only neglects us '' ( Early Life , p. 63 ) . And though in his later years he revised his poems many times , the revisions did not alter the essential nature of the style which he had established before he was thirty ; ; so that , while it usually is easy to recognize a poem by Hardy , it is difficult to date one . There is only one sense in which it is valid to talk about Hardy's development : he did develop toward a more consistent and more effective control of that tone which we recognize as uniquely his . There is only one Hardy style , but in the earlier poems that style is only intermittently evident , and when it is not , the style is the style of another poet , or of the fashion of the time . In the later poems , however , the personal tone predominates . The bad early poems are bad Shakespeare or bad Swinburne ; ; the bad late poems are bad Hardy . There are two ways of getting at a poet's development : through his dated poems , and through the revisions which he made in later editions of his work . About a quarter of Hardy's poems carry an appended date line , usually the year of completion , but sometimes inclusive years ( `` 1908 - 1910 '' ) or two separate dates when Hardy worked on the poem ( `` 1905 and 1926 '' ) or an approximate date ( `` During the War '' ) . These dates are virtually the only clues we have to the chronology of the poems , since the separate volumes are neither chronological within themselves nor in relation to each other . With the exception of Satires Of Circumstance , each volume contains dated poems ranging over several decades ( Winter Words spans sixty-one years ) ; ; the internal organization rarely has any chronological order , except in obvious groups like the `` Poems of Pilgrimage '' , the `` Poems of 1912 - 13 '' , and the war poems . From the dated poems we can venture certain conclusions about Hardy's career in poetry , always remembering that conclusions based on a fraction of the whole must remain tentative . The dated poems suggest that while Hardy's concern with poetry may have been constant , his production was not . He had two productive periods , one in the late 1860's , the other in the decade from 1910 to 1920 ( half of the dated poems are from the latter period , and these alone total about one-tenth of all Hardy's poems ) . There was one sterile period : only one poem is dated between 1872 and 1882 and , except for the poems written on the trip to Italy in 1887 , very few from 1882 to 1890 . The dated poems also give us an idea of the degree to which Hardy drew upon past productions for his various volumes , and therefore probably are an indication of the amount of poetry he was writing at the time . Poems Of The Past And The Present and Time's Laughing Stocks , both published while Hardy was at work on The Dynasts , draw heavily on poems written before 1900 . Satires Of Circumstance and Moments Of Vision , coming during his most productive decade , are relatively self-contained ; ; the former contains no poem dated before 1909 - 10 -- that is , no poem from a period covered by a previous volume -- and the latter has only a few such . The last three volumes are again more dependent on the past , as Hardy's creative powers declined in his old age . These observations about Hardy's productivity tally with the details of his life as we know them . The first productive period came when he was considering poetry as a vocation , before he had decided to write fiction for a living ( in his note for Who's Who he wrote that he `` wrote verses 1865 - 1868 ; ; gave up verse for prose , 1868 - 70 ; ; but resumed it later '' ) . During the poetically sterile years he was writing novels at the rate of almost one a year and was , in addition , burdened with bad health ( he spent six months in bed in 1881 , too ill to do more than work slowly and painfully at A Laodicean ) . Two entries in The Early Life support the assumption that during this period Hardy had virtually suspended the writing of poetry . Mrs. Hardy records that `` at the end of November ( 1881 ) he makes a note of an intention to resume poetry as soon as possible '' ( Early Life , p. 188 ) ; ; and on Christmas Day , 1890 , Hardy wrote : `` While thinking of resuming ' the viewless Wings Of Poesy before dawn this morning , new horizons seemed to open , and worrying pettinesses to disappear '' ( Early Life , p. 302 ) . There are more poems dated in the 1890's than in the '80's -- Hardy had apparently resumed the viewless wings as he decreased the volume of his fiction -- but none in 1891 , the year of Tess , and only one in 1895 , the year of Jude . After 1895 the number increases , and in the next thirty years there is only one year for which there is no dated poem -- 1903 , when Hardy was at work on The Dynasts . The second productive period , the decade from 1910 to 1920 , can be related to three events : the completion of The Dynasts in 1909 , which left Hardy free of pressure for the first time in forty years ; ; the death of Emma Hardy in 1912 , which had a profound emotional effect on Hardy for which he found release in poetry ; ; and the First World War . It may seem strange that a poet should come to full fruition in his seventies , but we have it on Hardy's own authority that `` he was a child till he was sixteen , a youth till he was five-and-twenty , and a young man till he was nearly fifty '' ( Early Life , p. 42 ) . We may carry this sequence one step further and say that at seventy he was a poet at the height of his powers , wanting only the impetus of two tragedies , one personal , the other national , to loose those powers in poetry . Hardy's two productive decades were separated by forty years , yet between them he developed only in that he became more steadily himself -- it was a narrowing , not an expanding process . Like a wise gardener , Hardy pruned away the Shakespearian sonnets and songs , and the elements of meter and poetic diction to which his personal style was not suited , and let the main stock of his talent flourish . The range of the later poetry is considerably narrower , but the number of successful poems is far greater . We can see the general characteristics of the earlier decade if we look at two poems of very different qualities : `` Revulsion '' ( 1866 ) and `` Neutral Tones '' ( 1867 ) . There is not much to be said for `` Revulsion '' . Like about half of the 1860 - 70 poems , it is a sonnet on a conventional theme -- the unhappiness of love . Almost anyone could have written it ; ; it is competent in the sense that it makes a coherent statement without violating the rules of the sonnet form , but it is entirely undistinguished and entirely unlike Hardy . The language is the conventional language of the form ; ; there is no phrase or image that sounds like Hardy or that is striking enough to give individuality to the poem . It is smoother than Hardy usually is , but with the smoothness of anonymity . It is obviously a young man's poem , written out of books and not out of experience ; ; it asserts emotion without evoking it -- that is to say , it is sentimental . There are many such competently anonymous performances among the earlier poems . `` Neutral Tones '' we immediately recognize as a fine poem in Hardy's most characteristic style : the plain but not quite colloquial language , the hard , particular , colorless images , the slightly odd stanza-form , the dramatic handling of the occasion , the refusal to resolve the issue -- all these we have seen in Hardy's best poems . The poem does not distort the syntax of ordinary speech nor draw on exotic sources of diction , yet it is obviously not ordinary speech -- only Hardy would say `` a grin of bitterness swept thereby ; ; like an ominous bird a-wing '' , or `` wrings with wrong '' , or would describe a winter sun as `` God-curst '' . The details of the setting of `` Neutral Tones '' are not , strictly speaking , metaphorical , but they combine to create a mood which is appropriate both to a dismal winter day and to the end of love , and in this way love and weather , the emotions and the elements , symbolize each other in a way that is common to many of Hardy's best poems ( `` Weathers '' , `` The Darkling Thrush '' , and `` During Wind and Rain '' , for example ) and to some moving passages in the novels as well ( Far From The Madding Crowd is full of scenes constructed in this way ) . `` Neutral Tones '' is an excellent example of Hardy's mature style , drawn from his earliest productive period ; ; I cite it as evidence that he did not develop through new styles as he grew older ( as Yeats did ) , but that he simply learned to use better what he already had . In the poem we recognize and acknowledge one man's sense of the world ; ; if it is somber , it is also precise , and the precision lends authority to the vision . In `` Revulsion '' , on the other hand , the pessimism is a case not proven ; ; the poem offers nothing to persuade us of the speaker's right to speak as he does . In the 1860 - 70 decade there are many poems like `` Revulsion '' , but there is only one `` Neutral Tones '' . Hardy was not Hardy very often . The `` Poems of 1912 - 13 '' offer a good example of Hardy's style as it was manifested in the later productive decade . These are the poems Hardy wrote after the death of his first wife ; ; they compose a painful elegy to what might have been , to a marriage that began with a promise of happiness , and ended in long years of suffering and hatred . Hardy obviously felt that these poems were peculiarly personal and private ; ; he sometimes called them `` an expiation '' , and he would not allow them to be published in periodicals . They are the only poems that he rearranged as a group between their first appearance ( in Satires Of Circumstance ) and the publication of the Collected Poems . The elegiac tone is Hardy's natural tone of voice , and it is not surprising that the 1912 - 13 poems are consistently and unmistakably his . The view is always toward the past ; ; but the mood is not quite nostalgic -- Hardy would not allow sentiment to soften his sense of the irredeemable pastness of the past , and the eternal deadness of the dead . The poems are , the epigraph tells us , the `` traces of an ancient flame '' ; ; the fire of love is dead , and Hardy stands , as the speaker does in the last poem of the sequence , over the burnt circle of charred sticks , and thinks of past happiness and present grief , honest and uncomforted . Critically invisible , modern revolt , like X-rays and radioactivity , is perceived only by its effects at more materialistic social levels , where it is called delinquency . `` Disaffiliation '' , by the way , is the term used by the critic and poet , Lawrence Lipton , who has written several articles on this subject , the first of which , in The Nation , quoted as Epigraph : `` We disaffiliate . '' -- John L. Lewis . Like the pillars of Hercules , like two ruined Titans guarding the entrance to one of Dante's circles , stand two great dead juvenile delinquents -- the heroes of the post-war generation : the great saxophonist , Charlie Parker , and Dylan Thomas . If the word deliberate means anything , both of them certainly deliberately destroyed themselves . Both of them were overcome by the horror of the world in which they found themselves , because at last they could no longer overcome that world with the weapon of a purely lyrical art . Both of them were my friends . Living in San Francisco I saw them seldom enough to see them with a perspective which was not distorted by exasperation or fatigue . So as the years passed , I saw them each time in the light of an accelerated personal conflagration . The last time I saw Bird , at Jimbo's Bob City , he was so gone -- so blind to the world -- that he literally sat down on me before he realized I was there . `` What happened , man '' ? ? I said , referring to the pretentious `` Jazz Concert '' . `` Evil , man , evil '' , he said , and that's all he said for the rest of the night . About dawn he got up to blow . The rowdy crowd chilled into stillness and the fluent melody spiraled through it . The last time I saw Dylan , his self-destruction had not just passed the limits of rationality . It had assumed the terrifying inertia of inanimate matter . Being with him was like being swept away by a torrent of falling stones . Now Dylan Thomas and Charlie Parker have a great deal more in common than the same disastrous end . As artists , they were very similar . They were both very fluent . But this fluent , enchanting utterance had , compared with important artists of the past , relatively little content . Neither of them got very far beyond a sort of entranced rapture at his own creativity . The principal theme of Thomas's poetry was the ambivalence of birth and death -- the pain of blood-stained creation . Music , of course , is not so explicit an art , but anybody who knew Charlie Parker knows that he felt much the same way about his own gift . Both of them did communicate one central theme : Against the ruin of the world , there is only one defense -- the creative act . This , of course , is the theme of much art -- perhaps most poetry . It is the theme of Horace , who certainly otherwise bears little resemblance to Parker or Thomas . The difference is that Horace accepted his theme with a kind of silken assurance . To Dylan and Bird it was an agony and terror . I do not believe that this is due to anything especially frightful about their relationship to their own creativity . I believe rather that it is due to the catastrophic world in which that creativity seemed to be the sole value . Horace's column of imperishable verse shines quietly enough in the lucid air of Augustan Rome . Art may have been for him the most enduring , orderly , and noble activity of man . But the other activities of his life partook of these values . They did not actively negate them . Dylan Thomas's verse had to find endurance in a world of burning cities and burning Jews . He was able to find meaning in his art as long as it was the answer to air raids and gas ovens . As the world began to take on the guise of an immense air raid or gas oven , I believe his art became meaningless to him . I think all this could apply to Parker just as well , although , because of the nature of music , it is not demonstrable -- at least not conclusively . Thomas and Parker have more in common than theme , attitude , life pattern . In the practice of their art , there is an obvious technical resemblance . Contrary to popular belief , they were not great technical innovators . Their effects are only superficially startling . Thomas is a regression from the technical originality and ingenuity of writers like Pierre Reverdy or Apollinaire . Similarly , the innovations of bop , and of Parker particularly , have been vastly overrated by people unfamiliar with music , especially by that ignoramus , the intellectual jitterbug , the jazz aficionado . The tonal novelties consist in the introduction of a few chords used in classical music for centuries . And there is less rhythmic difference between progressive jazz , no matter how progressive , and Dixieland , than there is between two movements of many conventional symphonies . What Parker and his contemporaries -- Gillespie , Davis , Monk , Roach ( Tristano is an anomaly ) , etc. -- did was to absorb the musical ornamentation of the older jazz into the basic structure , of which it then became an integral part , and with which it then developed . This is true of the melodic line which could be put together from selected passages of almost anybody -- Benny Carter , Johnny Hodges . It is true of the rhythmic pattern in which the beat shifts continuously , or at least is continuously sprung , so that it becomes ambiguous enough to allow the pattern to be dominated by the long pulsations of the phrase or strophe . This is exactly what happened in the transition from baroque to rococo music . It is the difference between Bach and Mozart . It is not a farfetched analogy to say that this is what Thomas did to poetry . The special syntactical effects of a Rimbaud or an Edith Sitwell -- actually ornaments -- become the main concern . The metaphysical conceits , which fascinate the Reactionary Generation still dominant in backwater American colleges , were embroideries . Thomas's ellipses and ambiguities are ends in themselves . The immediate theme , if it exists , is incidental , and his main theme -- the terror of birth -- is simply reiterated . This is one difference between Bird and Dylan which should be pointed out . Again , contrary to popular belief , there is nothing crazy or frantic about Parker either musically or emotionally . His sinuous melody is a sort of naive transcendence of all experience . Emotionally it does not resemble Berlioz or Wagner ; ; it resembles Mozart . This is true also of a painter like Jackson Pollock . He may have been eccentric in his behavior , but his paintings are as impassive as Persian tiles . Partly this difference is due to the nature of verbal communication . The insistent talk-aboutiveness of the general environment obtrudes into even the most idyllic poetry . It is much more a personal difference . Thomas certainly wanted to tell people about the ruin and disorder of the world . Parker and Pollock wanted to substitute a work of art for the world . Technique pure and simple , rendition , is not of major importance , but it is interesting that Parker , following Lester Young , was one of the leaders of the so-called saxophone revolution . In modern jazz , the saxophone is treated as a woodwind and played with conventional embouchure . Metrically , Thomas's verse was extremely conventional , as was , incidentally , the verse of that other tragic enrage , Hart Crane . I want to make clear what I consider the one technical development in the first wave of significant post-war arts . Ornament is confabulation in the interstices of structure . A poem by Dylan Thomas , a saxophone solo by Charles Parker , a painting by Jackson Pollock -- these are pure confabulations as ends in themselves . Confabulation has come to determine structure . Uninhibited lyricism should be distinguished from its exact opposite -- the sterile , extraneous invention of the corn-belt metaphysicals , or present blight of poetic professors . Just as Hart Crane had little influence on anyone except very reactionary writers -- like Allen Tate , for instance , to whom Valery was the last word in modern poetry and the felicities of an Apollinaire , let alone a Paul Eluard were nonsense -- so Dylan Thomas's influence has been slight indeed . In fact , his only disciple -- the only person to imitate his style -- was W. S. Graham , who seems to have imitated him without much understanding , and who has since moved on to other methods . Thomas's principal influence lay in the communication of an attitude -- that of the now extinct British romantic school of the New Apocalypse -- Henry Treece , J. F. Hendry , and others -- all of whom were quite conventional poets . Parker certainly had much more of an influence . At one time it was the ambition of every saxophone player in every high school band in America to blow like Bird . Even before his death this influence had begun to ebb . In fact , the whole generation of the founding fathers of bop -- Gillespie , Monk , Davis , Blakey , and the rest -- are just now at a considerable discount . The main line of development today goes back to Lester Young and by-passes them . The point is that many of the most impressive developments in the arts nowadays are aberrant , idiosyncratic . There is no longer any sense of continuing development of the sort that can be traced from Baudelaire to Eluard , or for that matter , from Hawthorne through Henry James to Gertrude Stein . The cubist generation before World War 1 , , and , on a lower level , the surrealists of the period between the wars , both assumed an accepted universe of discourse , in which , to quote Andre Breton , it was possible to make definite advances , exactly as in the sciences . I doubt if anyone holds such ideas today . Continuity exits , but like the neo-swing music developed from Lester Young , it is a continuity sustained by popular demand . In the plastic arts , a very similar situation exists . Surrealists like Hans Arp and Max Ernst might talk of creation by hazard -- of composing pictures by walking on them with painted soles , or by tossing bits of paper up in the air . But it is obvious that they were self-deluded . Nothing looks anything like an Ernst or an Arp but another Ernst or Arp . Nothing looks less like their work than the happenings of random occasion . Many of the post-World War 2 , abstract expressionists , apostles of the discipline of spontaneity and hazard , look alike , and do look like accidents . The aesthetic appeal of pure paint laid on at random may exist , but it is a very impoverished appeal . Once again what has happened is an all-consuming confabulation of the incidentals , the accidents of painting . It is curious that at its best , the work of this school of painting -- Mark Rothko , Jackson Pollock , Clyfford Still , Robert Motherwell , Willem De-Kooning , and the rest -- resembles nothing so much as the passage painting of quite unimpressive painters : the mother-of-pearl shimmer in the background of a Henry McFee , itself a formula derived from Renoir ; ; the splashes of light and black which fake drapery in the fashionable imitators of Hals and Sargent . Often work of this sort is presented as calligraphy -- the pure utterance of the brush stroke seeking only absolute painteresque values . You have only to compare such painting with the work of , say , Sesshu , to realize that someone is using words and brushes carelessly . At its best the abstract expressionists achieve a simple rococo decorative surface . Its poverty shows up immediately when compared with Tiepolo , where the rococo rises to painting of extraordinary profundity and power . A Tiepolo painting , however confabulated , is a universe of tensions in vast depths . A Pollock is an object of art -- bijouterie -- disguised only by its great size . In fact , once the size is big enough to cover a whole wall , it turns into nothing more than extremely expensive wallpaper . Now there is nothing wrong with complicated wallpaper . There is just more to Tiepolo . The great Ashikaga brush painters painted wallpapers , too -- at least portable ones , screens . A process of elimination which leaves the artist with nothing but the play of his materials themselves cannot sustain interest in either artist or public for very long . So , in the last couple of years , abstract expressionism has tended toward romantic suggestion -- indications of landscape or living figures . Anglo-Saxon and Greek epic each provide on two occasions a seemingly authentic account of the narration of verse in the heroic age . Hrothgar's court bard sings of the encounters at Finnsburg ( lines 1068 - 1159 ) , and improvises the tale of Beowulf's exploits in a complimentary comparison of the Geatish visitor with Sigemund ( lines 871 - 892 ) ; ; Alcinous' court bard sings of the discovered adultery of Ares and Aphrodite ( Odyssey 8 266-366 ) , and takes up a tale of Odysseus while the Ithacan wanderer listens on ( Odyssey 8 499-520 ) . Nothing in all this is autobiographical : unlike the poets of Deor and Widsith , the poet of Beowulf is not concerned with his own identity ; ; the poet of The Odyssey , reputed blind , reveals himself not at all in singing of the blind minstrel Demodocus . Since none of these glimpses of poetizing without writing is intended to incorporate a signature into the epic matter , there is prima-facie evidence that Beowulf and the Homeric poems each derive from an oral tradition . That such a tradition lies behind The Iliad and The Odyssey , at least , is hard to deny . Milman Parry rigorously defended the observation that the extant Homeric poems are largely formulaic , and was led to postulate that they could be shown entirely formulaic if the complete corpus of Greek epic survived ; ; he further reasoned that frequent formulas in epic verse indicate oral composition , and assumed the slightly less likely corollary that oral epic is inclined towards the use of formulas . Proceeding from Parry's conclusions and adopting one of his schemata , Francis P. Magoun , Jr. , argues that Beowulf likewise was created from a legacy of oral formulas inherited and extended by bards of successive generations , and the thesis is striking and compelling . Yet a fresh inspection will indicate one crucial amendment : Beowulf and the Homeric poems are not at all formulaic to the same extent . The bondage endurable by an oral poet is to be estimated only by a very skilful oral poet , but it appears safe to assume that no sustained narrative in rhyme could be composed without extreme difficulty , even in a language of many terminal inflections . Assonance seems nearly as severe a curb , although in a celebrated passage William of Malmesbury declares that A Song Of Roland was intoned before the battle commenced at Hastings . The Anglo-Saxon alliterative line and the Homeric hexameter probably imposed less of a restraint ; ; the verse of Beowulf or of The Iliad and The Odyssey was not easy to create but was not impossible for poets who had developed their talents perforce in earning a livelihood . Yet certain aids were valuable and quite credibly necessary for reciting long stretches of verse without a pause . The poet in a written tradition who generally never blots a line may once in a while pause and polish without incurring blame . But the oral poet cannot pause ; ; he must improvise continuously with no apparent effort . Even though the bondage of his verse is not so great as the writing poet can manage , it is still great enough for him often to be seriously impeded unless he has aids to facilitate rapid composition . The Germanic poet had such aids in the kennings , which provided for the difficulties of alliteration ; ; the Homeric poet had epithets , which provided for recurring needs in the hexameter . Either poet could quickly and easily select words or phrases to supply his immediate requirements as he chanted out his lines , because the kennings and the epithets made possible the construction of systems of numerous synonyms for the chief common and proper nouns . Other synonyms could of course serve the same function , and for the sake of ease I shall speak of kennings and epithets in the widest and loosest possible sense , and name , for example , Gar-Dene a kenning for the Danes . Verbal and adverbial elements too participated in each epic diction , but it is for the present sufficient to mark the large nominal and adjectival supply of semantic near-equivalents , and to designate the members of any system of equivalents as basic formulas of the poetic language . Limited to a few thousand lines of heroic verse in Anglo-Saxon as in the other Germanic dialects , we cannot say how frequently the kennings in Beowulf recurred in contemporary epic on the same soil . But we can say that since a writing poet , with leisure before him , would seem unlikely to invent a technique based upon frequent and substantial circumlocution , the kennings like the epithets must reasonably be ascribed to an oral tradition . One of the greatest Homerists of our time , Frederick M. Combellack , argues that when it is assumed The Iliad and The Odyssey are oral poems , the postulated single redactor called Homer cannot be either credited with or denied originality in choice of phrasing . Any example of grand or exquisite diction may have been created by the poet who compiled numerous lays into the two works we possess or may be due to one of his completely unknown fellow-craftsmen . The quest of the historical Homer is likely never to have further success ; ; no individual word in The Iliad or The Odyssey can be credited to any one man ; ; no strikingly effective element of speech in the extant poems can with assurance be said not to have been a commonplace in the vaster epic corpus that may have existed at the beginning of the first millennium before Christ . This observation is of interest not only to students of Homeric poetry but to students of Anglo-Saxon poetry as well . To the extent that a tale is twice told , its final author must be suspect , although plagiarism in an oral tradition is less a misdemeanor than the standard modus dicendi . Combellack argues further , and here he makes his main point , that once The Iliad and The Odyssey are thought formulaic poems composed for an audience accustomed to formulaic poetry , Homeric critics are deprived of an entire domain they previously found arable . With a few important and a few more unimportant exceptions , no expression can be deemed le mot juste for its context , because each was very probably the only expression that long-established practice and ease of rapid recitation would allow . Words or phrases that connoisseurs have admired as handsome or ironic or humorous must therefore lose merit and become regarded as mere inevitable time-servers , sometimes accurate and sometimes not . This observation too may have reference to Anglo-Saxon poetry . To the extent that a language is formulaic , its individual components must be regarded as no more distinguished than other cliches . W. F. Bryan suggests that certain kennings in Beowulf were selected sometimes for appropriateness and sometimes for ironic inappropriateness , but such a view would appear untenable unless it is denied that the language of Beowulf is formulaic . If the master of scops who was most responsible for the poem ever used kennings that were traditional , he was at least partly deprived of free will and not inclined towards shrewd and sophisticated misuse of speech elements . Once many significant phrases are found in theory or in recurrent practice to provide for prosodic necessity , they are not to be defended for their semantic properties in isolated contexts . It is false to be certain of having discovered in the language of Beowulf such effects as intentional irony . Yet , if the argument is turned awry , there may be found a great deal in Bryan's view , after all . A formulaic element need not be held meaningless merely because it was selected with little conscious reflection . Time-servers , though the periphrastic expressions are , they may nevertheless be handsome or ironic or humorous . A long evolution in an oral tradition caused the poetic language of the heroic age to be based upon formulas that show the important qualities of things , and these formulas are therefore potentially rather than always actually accurate . True , we do not know how they were regarded in their day , but we need not believe the epic audience to have been more insensitive to the formulas than the numerous scholars of modern times who have read Germanic or Homeric poetry all their lives and still found much to admire in occasional occurrences of the most familiar phrases . Nouns and adjectives in a written tradition are chosen for the nonce ; ; in an oral tradition they may be chosen for the entire epic corpus , and tend towards idealization rather than distinctive delineation . Reliance is therefore not to be placed upon the archaeological particulars in an oral poem ; ; no-one today would hope to discover the unmistakable ruins of Heorot or the palace of Priam . A ship at dry-dock could be called a foamy-necked floater in Anglo-Saxon or a swift ship in Greek . Even when defenseless of weapons the Danes would be Gar-Dene ( as their king is Hrothgar ) and Priam would be EUMMELIHS . Achilles , like Siegfried in The Nibelungenlied , is potentially the swiftest of men and may accordingly be called swift-footed even when he stands idle . In Coriolanus the agnomen of Marcius is used deliberately and pointedly , but the Homeric epithets and the Anglo-Saxon kennings are used casually and recall to the hearer `` a familiar story or situation or a useful or pleasant quality of the referent '' . The epic language was not entirely the servant of the poet ; ; it was partly his master . The poet's intentions are difficult to discern and , except to biographers , unimportant ; ; the language , however , is a proper object of scrutiny , and the effects of the language are palpable even if sometimes inevitable . Beowulf and the Homeric poems appear oral compositions . Yet they are written ; ; at some stage in their evolution they were transcribed . Albert B. Lord suggests that the Homeric poems were dictated to a scribe by a minstrel who held in his mind the poems fully matured but did not himself possess the knowledge of writing since it would be useless to his guild , and Magoun argues that the Beowulf poet and Cynewulf may have dictated their verse in the same fashion . This explanation is attractive , but is vitiated at least in part by the observation that Cynewulf , though he used kennings in the traditional manner , was a literate man who four times inscribed his name by runes into his works . If Cynewulf was literate , the Beowulf poet may have been also , and so may the final redactor of The Iliad and The Odyssey . In lieu of the amanuensis to the blind or illiterate bard , one may conceive of a man who heard a vast store of oral poetry recited , and became intimately familiar with the established aids to poetizing , and himself wrote his own compositions or his edition of the compositions of the past . Other theories of origin are compatible with the formulaic theory : Beowulf may contain a design for terror , and The Iliad may have a vast hysteron-proteron pattern answering to a ceramic pattern produced during the Geometric Period in pottery . The account of the growth and final transcription of these epics rests partly , however , upon the degree to which they were formulaic . Carl Eduard Schmidt counted 1804 different lines repeated exactly in the two Homeric poems , and by increasing this figure so as to include lines repeated with very slight modifications he counted 2118 different lines used a total of 5612 times . Thus one line in five from The Iliad and The Odyssey is to be found somewhere else in the two poems . The ratio is thoroughly remarkable , because the lines are so long -- half again as long as those of Beowulf . Anglo-Saxon poetry appears to have no comparable amount of repetition ; ; there is no reason to think that the scop used and re-used whole lines and even lengthy passages after the manner of his Homeric colleague . In determining the extent to which any poem is formulaic it is idle , however , to inspect nothing besides lines repeated in their entirety , for a stock of line-fragments would be sufficient to permit the poet to extemporize with deftness if they provided for prosodic needs . The closest scrutiny is owed to the Anglo-Saxon kennings and the Homeric epithets ; ; if any words or phrases are formulaic , they will be . The Iliad has two words for the shield , ASPIS and SAKOS . Recent criticism of Great Expectations has tended to emphasize its symbolic and mythic content , to show , as M. D. Zabel has said of Dickens generally , that much of the novel's impact resides in its `` allegoric insight and moral metaphor '' . J. H. Miller's excellent chapter on Great Expectations has lately illustrated how fruitfully that novel can be read from such a perspective . In his analysis , however , he touches upon but fails to explore an idea , generally neglected in discussions of the book , which I believe is central to its art -- the importance of human hands as a recurring feature of the narrative . This essay seeks to make that exploration . Dickens was not for nothing the most theatrical of the great Victorian writers . He knew instinctively that next to voice and face an actor's hands are his most useful possession -- that in fiction as in the theatre , gesture is an indispensable shorthand for individualizing character and dramatizing action and response . It is hardly accidental , therefore , that many of his most vivid figures do suggestive or eccentric things with their hands . In Great Expectations the hands become almost an obsession . Mr. Jaggers habitually bites his forefinger , a gesture which conveys both contempt and the inscrutable abstractedness that half fascinates , half terrifies all who have dealings with him . Miss Havisham's withered hands , heavy as if her unhappiness were somehow concentrated in them , move in restless self-pity between her broken heart and her walking stick . Pumblechook's `` signature '' is the perpetually extended glad hand . Wemmick reveals his self-satisfaction by regularly rubbing his hands together . Old Mr. Pocket's frantic response to life imprisonment with a useless , social-climbing wife is to `` put his two hands into his disturbed hair '' and `` make an extraordinary effort to lift himself up by it '' , whereas Joe Gargery endures the shrewish onslaughts of Mrs. Joe by apologetically drawing `` the back of his hand across and across his nose '' . Such mannerisms would be less worthy of remark , were it not that in Great Expectations , as in no other of Dickens' novels , hands serve as a leitmotif of plot and theme -- a kind of unifying symbol or natural metaphor for the book's complex of human interrelationships and the values and attitudes that motivate them . Dickens not only reveals character through gesture , he makes hands a crucial element of the plot , a means of clarifying the structure of the novel by helping to define the hero's relations with all the major characters , and a device for ordering such diverse themes as guilt , pursuit , crime , greed , education , materialism , enslavement ( by both people and institutions ) , friendship , romantic love , forgiveness , and redemption . We have only to think of Lady Macbeth or the policeman-murderer in Thomas Burke's famous story , `` The Hands Of Mr. Ottermole '' , to realize that hands often call up ideas of crime and punishment . So it is with Great Expectations , whether the hands be Orlick's as he strikes down Mrs. Gargery or Pip's as he steals a pie from her pantry . Such associations suit well with the gothic or mystery-story aspects of Dickens' novel , but , on a deeper plane , they relate to the themes of sin , guilt , and pursuit that have recently been analyzed by other critics . The novel opens with a fugitive convict frantically trying to avoid the nemesis of being `` laid hands on '' -- a mysterious figure who looks into Pip's frightened eyes in the churchyard `` as if he were eluding the hands of the dead people , stretching up cautiously out of their graves , to get a twist upon his ankle and pull him in '' . Magwitch terrifies Pip into stealing a pork pie for him by creating the image in the boy's imagination of a bogy man who may `` softly creep his way to him and tear him open '' , `` imbruing his hands '' in him . As Pip agonizes over the theft that his own hands have committed , his guilty conscience projects itself upon the wooden finger of a local signpost , transforming it into `` a phantom devoting me to the Hulks '' . Held upside down in the graveyard , Pip clings in terror `` with both hands '' to his convict ; ; later he flees in panic from the family table just as his theft is about to be discovered and is blocked at the front door by a soldier who accusingly holds out a pair of handcuffs which he has brought to Gargery's forge for mending . Through such details Dickens indicates at the outset that guilt is a part of the ironic bond between Pip and Magwitch which is so unpredictably to alter both their lives . Since they commonly translate thoughts and feelings into deeds , hands naturally represent action , and since nearly half the characters in Great Expectations are of the underworld or closely allied to it , the linking of hands with crime or violence is not to be wondered at . Dickens , for excellent psychological reasons , never fully reveals Magwitch's felonious past , but Pip , at the convict's climactic reappearance in London , shrinks from clasping a hand which he fears `` might be stained with blood '' . Orlick slouches about the forge `` like Cain '' with `` his hands in his pockets '' , and when he shouts abuse at Mrs. Joe for objecting to his holiday , she claps her hands in a tantrum , beats them `` upon her bosom and upon her knees '' , and clenches them in her husband's hair . This last `` rampage '' is only the prelude to the vicious blow upon her head , `` dealt by some unknown hand '' whose identity is later revealed not verbally but through a manual action -- the tracing of Orlick's hammer upon a slate . Pip himself is to feel the terror of Orlick's `` murderous hand '' in his secret rendezvous at the sluicehouse on the marshes . Dickens lays great emphasis on the hands in this scene . Orlick shakes his hand at Pip , bangs the table with his fist , draws his unclenched hand `` across his mouth as if his mouth watered '' for his victim , lets his hands hang `` loose and heavy at his sides '' , and Pip observes him so intensely that he knows `` of the slightest action of his fingers '' . Orlick might almost be Magwitch's bogy man come alive , a figure of nemesis from Pip's phantasy of guilt . The scarred , disfigured wrists of Mr. Jaggers' housekeeper are the tell-tale marks of her sinister past , for her master , coolly exhibiting them to his dinner guests , makes a point of the `` force of grip there is in these hands '' . Jaggers' iron control over her ( `` she would remove her hands from any dish she put before him , hesitatingly , as if she dreaded his calling her back ) '' ) rests on his having once got her acquitted of a murder charge by cleverly contriving her sleeves at the trial to conceal her strength and by passing off the lacerations on the backs of her hands as the scratches of brambles rather than of human fingernails . It is the similarity between Estella's hands and Molly's ( `` The action of her fingers was like the action of knitting '' ) that provides Pip with a vital clue to the real identity of both and establishes a symbolic connection between the underworld of crime and the genteel cruelty of Satis House . Finally , Magwitch's pursuit of Compeyson , his archenemy and betrayer , begins by his holding him in a vicelike grip on the river flats to frustrate his escape and culminates in his `` laying his hand on his cloak to identify him '' , thus precipitating the death-locked struggle in the water during which Compeyson drowns . Magwitch's hand here ironically becomes the agent of justice . But only in one of its aspects is Great Expectations a tale of violence , revenge , and retribution . Money , so important a theme elsewhere in Dickens , is here central , and hands are often associated in some way with the false values -- acquisitiveness , snobbery , self-interest , hypocrisy , toadyism , irresponsibility , injustice -- that attach to a society based upon the pursuit of wealth . Dickens suggests the economic evils of such a society on the first page of his novel in the description of Pip's five little dead brothers `` who gave up trying to get a living exceedingly early in that universal struggle '' , who seemed to have `` all been born on their backs with their hands in their trousers-pockets , and had never taken them out in this state of existence '' . Pip's great expectations , his progress through illusion and disillusionment , turn , somewhat as they do for the naive hero of Dreiser's American Tragedy , upon the lure of genteel prosperity through unearned income -- what Wemmick calls `` portable property '' and what Jaggers reproaches Pip for letting `` slip through ( his ) fingers '' . Since a gentleman must , if possible , avoid sullying them by work , his hands , as importantly as his accent , become the index of social status . Almost the first step in the corruption of Pip's values is the unworthy shame he feels when Estella cruelly remarks the coarseness of his hands : `` They had never troubled me before , but they troubled me now , as vulgar appendages '' . Pip imagines how Estella would look down upon Joe's hands , roughened by work in the smithy , and the deliberate contrast between her white hands and his blackened ones is made to symbolize the opposition of values between which Pip struggles -- idleness and work , artificiality and naturalness , gentility and commonness , coldness and affection -- in fact , between Satis House and the forge . When the snobbery that alienates Pip from Joe finally gives way before the deeper and stronger force of love , the reunion is marked by an embarrassed handshake at which Pip exclaims : `` No , don't wipe it off -- for God's sake , give me your blackened hand '' ! ! Pip's abject leave-taking of Miss Havisham , during which he kneels to kiss her hand , signalizes his homage to a supposed patroness who seems to be opening up for him a new world of glamour ; ; when , on the journey to London that immediately follows , he pauses nostalgically to lay his hand upon the finger-post at the end of the village , the wooden pointer symbolically designates a spiritual frontier between innocence and the corruption of worldly vanity . Incidentally , one cannot miss the significance of this gesture , for Dickens reintroduces it associatively in Pip's mind at another moral and psychological crisis -- his painful recognition , in a talk with Herbert Pocket , that his hopeless attachment to Estella is as self-destructive as it is romantic . In both cases the finger-post represents Pip's heightened awareness of contrary magnetisms . A variety of hand movements helps dramatize the moral climate of the fallen world Pip encounters beyond the forge . The vulture-like attendance of the Pocket family upon Miss Havisham is summed up in the hypocritical gestures of Miss Camilla Pocket , who puts her hand to her throat in a feigned spasm of grief-stricken choking , then lays it `` upon her heaving bosom '' with `` an unnatural fortitude of manner '' , and finally kisses it to Miss Havisham in a parody of the lady's own mannerism toward Estella . Pumblechook's hands throughout the novel serve to travesty greed and hypocritical self-aggrandizement . We first see him shaking Mrs. Joe's hand on discovering the sizable amount of the premium paid to her husband for Pip's indenture as an apprentice and later pumping Pip's hands `` for the hundredth time at least '' ( `` May I -- may I -- '' ? ? ) in effusive congratulation to Pip on his expectations . We take leave of Pumblechook as he gloats over Pip's loss of fortune , extending his hand `` with a magnificently forgiving air '' and exhibiting `` the same fat five fingers '' , one of which he identifies with `` the finger of Providence '' and shakes at Pip in a canting imputation of the latter's `` ingratitoode '' and his own generosity as Pip's `` earliest benefactor '' . Pip first learns `` the stupendous power of money '' from the sycophantic tailor , Mr. Trabb , whose brutality to his boy helper exactly matches the financial resource of each new customer , and whose fawning hands touch `` the outside of each elbow '' and `` rub '' Pip out of the shop . The respectability which money confers implies a different etiquette , and , upon taking up the life of a London gentleman , Pip must learn from Herbert Pocket that `` the spoon is not generally used over-hand , but under '' . The following items may be specified in actual or symbolic form in the operands of those instructions which refer to the particular items : channel , unit , combined channel and unit , combined arm and file , unit record synchronizers , inquiry synchronizers , and alteration switches . The declarative operation EQU is used to equate symbolic names to item numbers ( see page 85 ) . Continuation cards Certain Autocoder statements make provision for more parameters than may be contained in the operand ( columns 21 - 75 ) of a single line on the Autocoder coding sheet . When this is the case , the appropriate section of this manual will indicate that `` Continuation Cards '' may be used . Thus , when specifically permitted , the operand of a given line on the Autocoder coding sheet may be continued in the operand of from one to four additional lines which immediately follow . The label and operation columns must be blank and the continuation of the operand must begin in column 21 ; ; i.e. , it must be left-justified in the operand column of the coding sheet . The operand need not extend across the entire operand column of either the header card or continuation cards but may end with the comma following any parameter . Remarks may appear to the right of the last parameter on each card provided they are separated from the operand by at least two blank spaces . Illustrations of the use of continuation cards are included throughout the examples illustrating the various statements . If a continuation card follows a statement that does not permit continuation cards , the compiler will generate a NOP and issue an error message . Additional restrictions regarding the use of continuation cards with macro-instructions appear on page 106 . Reservation of index words and electronic switches The assignment of actual addresses to symbolic index word and electronic switch names occurs in Phase 3 , of the Autocoder processor . The initial availability of index words and electronic switches is determined by a table which is included in the Compiler Systems Tape . This table originally indicates that index words 1 through 96 and electronic switches 1 through 30 are available for assignment to symbolic references ; ; index words 97 through 99 are not available . The initial setting of this table may be altered , however , as described in the 7070/7074 Data Processing System Bulletin `` IBM 7070/7074 Compiler System : Operating Procedure '' , form Aj . During the first pass of Phase 3 , , references to the actual addresses of index words and electronic switches are collected and the availability table is updated . At the end of this pass , the table indicates which index words and electronic switches are not available for assignment to symbolic references . Both index words and electronic switches may have been made unavailable before the start of assignment in one of the following ways . 1 . The initial setting of the availability table indicated that the index word or electronic switch was not available for assignment . 2 . The one- or two-digit number of the index word or electronic switch was used in the operand of a symbolic machine instruction to specify indexing or as a parameter which is always an index word or electronic switch , e.g. , 3 . The one- or two-digit number of the index word or electronic switch was used in the operand of an EQU statement , e.g. , When the index words or electronic switches are reserved because of actual usage in the statements described above , the position or order of the statements within the program is not important ; ; any such reference will make the index word or electronic switch unavailable at the end of this pass . During the assignment pass of Phase 3 , , index words and electronic switches are reserved as they are encountered during assignment . Index words and electronic switches may be reserved in the following ways . The first two methods apply to both index words and electronic switches ; ; the third applies only to index words . 1 . During the assignment pass , each instruction is examined for reference to the symbolic name of an index word or electronic switch . When such a reference is found , an actual address is assigned and the availability table is changed so that the assigned index word or switch is no longer available for later assignment . 2 . If the one- or two-digit address of an index word or electronic switch is used or is included in the operand of an XRESERVE or SRESERVE statement ( see page 99 ) , the corresponding index word or electronic switch is reserved . 3 . If a statement has been assigned an address in the index word area by means of an actual label or by means of an origin statement which refers to an actual address , the corresponding index word will be reserved . These entries should normally appear at the beginning of the program or immediately following each LITORIGIN statement . Otherwise , symbolic names may have previously been assigned to these same index words . ( This method does not apply to electronic switches . ) The preceding methods allow efficient use of index words and electronic switches during a sectionalized or multi-phase program , particularly when used in conjunction with the LITORIGIN statement . Extreme caution should be used , however , to avoid the conflicting usage of an index word or electronic switch which may result from the assignment of more than one name or function to the same address . If the symbolic name or actual address of an index word or electronic switch appears or is included in the operand of an XRELEASE or SRELEASE statement ( see page 101 ) , the specified index word or electronic switch will again be made available , regardless of the method by which it was reserved . It will not , however , be used for symbolic assignment until all other index words or electronic switches have been assigned for the first time . If , at any time during the assignment pass , the compiler finds that there are no more index words available for assignment , the warning message `` No More Index Words Available '' will be placed in the object program listing , the table will be altered to show that index words 1 through 96 are available , and the assignment will continue as before . If the compiler finds that there are no more electronic switches available for assignment , the warning message `` No More Electronic Switches Available '' will be placed in the object program listing , the table will be altered to show that electronic switches 1 through 30 are available , and assignment will continue as before . The resultant conflicting usage of index words or electronic switches may be avoided by reducing the number of symbolic names used , e.g. , through the proper use of the EQU , XRELEASE , or SRELEASE statements . As noted in Appendix C , index words 97 through 99 are never available for assignment to symbolic names by the compiler ; ; also , index words 93 through 96 may have been made unavailable for assignment . Declarative statements Autocoder declarative statements provide the processor with the necessary information to complete the imperative operations properly . Declarative statements are never executed in the object program and should be separated from the program instruction area , placed preferably at its beginning or end . Otherwise , special care must be taken to branch around them so that the program will not attempt to execute something in a data area as an instruction . If the compiler does encounter such statements , a warning message will be issued . 7070/7074 Autocoder includes the following declarative statements : DA ( Define Area ) , DC ( Define Constant ) , DRDW ( Define Record Definition Word ) , DSW ( Define Switch ) , DLINE ( Define Line ) , EQU ( Equate ) , CODE,DTF ( Define Tape File ) , DIOCS ( Define Input/Output Control System ) , and DUF ( Descriptive Entry For Unit Records ) . DA , DC , DTF , and DLINE require more than one entry . The DA statement is used to name and define the positions and length of fields within an area . The DC statement is used to name and enter constants into the object program . Since the 7070 and 7074 make use of record definition words ( RDWS ) to read , write , move , and otherwise examine blocks of storage , the DA and DC statements provide the option of generating RDWS automatically . When so instructed , Autocoder will generate one or more RDWS and assign them successive locations immediately preceding the area with which they are to be associated . An RDW will be of the form Af , where xxxx is the starting location of the area and yyyy is its ending location . These addresses are calculated automatically by the processor . In some cases , it may be more advantageous to assign locations to RDWS associated with DA and DC areas in some other part of storage , i.e. , not immediately preceding the DA or DC areas . The DRDW statement may be used for this purpose . The DRDW statement may also be used to generate an RDW defining any area specified by the programmer . As many as ten digital switches may be named and provided by the DSW statement for consideration by the SETSW and logic macro-instructions . Each switch occupies one digit position in a word , can be set on or off , and is considered as logically equivalent to an electronic switch . It cannot , however , be referred to by electronic switch commands , e.g. , ESN , BSN , etc. . An individual switch or the entire set of switches in a word may be tested or altered as desired . Through use of the DLINE statement , a means is provided for specifying both the editing of fields to be inserted in a print line area and the layout of the area itself . The area may include constant information supplied by the programmer . The area may also be provided with additional data during the running of the object program by means of EDMOV or move macro-instructions . The declarative statement EQU permits the programmer to equate symbolic names to actual index words , electronic switches , arm and file numbers , tape channel and unit numbers , alteration switches , etc. , and to equate a symbol to another symbol or to an actual address . The DIOCS , DTF , and DUF statements are used when required by the Input/Output Control System . DIOCS is used to select the major methods of processing to be used , and to name the index words used by Aj . Each tape file must be described by Tape File Specifications , produced by Aj . In addition to information related to the file and its records , the File Specifications contain subroutine locations and the location of tape label information . A DUF entry must be supplied for every unit record file describing the type of file and the unit record equipment to be used . The DUF also supplies the locations of subroutines written by the user that are unique to the file . A full description of the DIOCS , DTF , and DUF statements is contained in the 7070 Data Processing System Bulletin `` IBM 7070 Input/Output Control System '' , form Aj . Brief descriptions of these three declarative statements and detailed descriptions of the formats and functions of each of the other 7070/7074 Autocoder declarative statements follow below . diocs -- define input/output control system When the Input/Output Control System is to be used in a program , a DIOCS statement must be used to select the major methods of processing to be used . This statement also allows the naming of the index words used by Aj . Source program format The basic format of the DIOCS statement is as follows : anylabel is any symbolic label ; ; it may be omitted . The entry DIOCS must be written exactly as shown . The first item in the operand , IOCSIXF , is used to specify the first IOCS index word for programs using tape files . This item may be a symbolic name or an actual one-digit or two-digit index word address in the range 3 - 94 . If the first item in the operand is omitted , the symbolic name IOCSIXF will be assigned . When an actual index word or a symbolic address is specified , Autocoder will equate the name IOCSIXF to it . The second item in the operand , IOCSIXG , is used to specify the second IOCS index word for programs using tape files . This item may be a symbolic name or an actual one-digit or two-digit index word address in the range 3 - 94 . If the second item in the operand is omitted , the symbolic name IOCSIXG will be assigned . When an actual index word or a symbolic address is specified , Autocoder will equate IOCSIXG to it . In the Midwest , oxidation ponds are used extensively for the treatment of domestic sewage from suburban areas . The high cost of land and a few operational problems resulting from excessive loadings have created the need for a wastewater treatment system with the operational characteristics of the oxidation pond but with the ability to treat more organic matter per unit volume . Research at Fayette , Missouri on oxidation ponds has shown that the BOD in the treated effluent varied from 30 to 53 mg/l with loadings from 8 to 120 lb . Since experience indicates that effluents from oxidation ponds do not create major problems at these BOD concentrations , the goal for the effluent quality of the accelerated treatment system was the same as from conventional oxidation ponds . Recent studies by Weston and Stack had indicated that a turbine aerator could be added to an oxidation pond to increase the rate of oxygen transfer . Their study showed that it was possible to transfer 3 to 4 lb of oxygen / hr. / hp. . O'Connor and Eckenfelder discussed the use of aerated lagoons for treating organic wastes . They indicated that a 4-day retention , aerated lagoon would give 60 to 76 per cent BOD reduction . Later , Eckenfelder increased the efficiency of treatment to between 75 and 85 per cent in the summer months . It appeared from the limited information available that the aerated lagoon might offer a satisfactory means of increasing the capacity of existing oxidation ponds as well as providing the same degree of treatment in a smaller volume . Red Bridge Subdivision With the development of the Red Bridge Subdivision south of Kansas City , Missouri , the developer was faced with the problem of providing adequate sewage disposal . The sewage system from Kansas City was not expected to serve the Red Bridge area for several years . This necessitated the construction of temporary sewage treatment facilities with an expected life from 5 to 15 Aj . For the initial development an oxidation pond was constructed as shown in Figure 1 . The oxidation pond has a surface area of 4.77 acres and a depth of 4 Aj . The pond is currently serving 1,230 persons or 260 persons per acre . In the summer of 1960 the oxidation pond became completely septic and emitted obnoxious odors . It was possible to maintain aerobic conditions in the pond by regular additions of sodium nitrate until the temperature decreased and the algae population changed from blue-green to green algae . The anaerobic conditions in the existing oxidation pond necessitated examination of other methods for supplying additional oxygen than by sodium nitrate . At the same time further expansion in the Red Bridge Subdivision required the construction of additional sewage treatment facilities . The large land areas required for oxidation ponds made this type of treatment financially unattractive to the developer . It was proposed that aerated lagoons be used to eliminate the problem at the existing oxidation ponds and to provide the necessary treatment for the additional development . Pilot lagoon The lack of adequate data on the aerated lagoon system prompted the developer to construct an aerated lagoon pilot plant to determine its feasibility for treating domestic sewage . The pilot plant was a circular lagoon 81 ft in diam at the surface and 65 ft in diam at the bottom , 4 ft below the surface , with a volume of 121,000 Aj . The side slopes were coated with fiberglas matting coated with asphalt to prevent erosion . The pilot lagoon was located as shown in Figure 1 to serve the area just south of the existing housing area . The major contributor was a shopping center with houses being added to the system as the subdivision developed . The pilot lagoon was designed to handle the wastes from 314 persons with a 4-day aeration period . Initially , the wastewater would be entirely from the shopping center with the domestic sewage from the houses increasing over an 18-month period . This operation would permit evaluation of the pilot plant , with a slowly increasing load , over a reasonable period of time . The pilot plant was equipped with a 3-hp. turbine aerator ( Figure 2 ) . The aerator had a variable-speed drive to permit operation through a range of speeds . The sewage flow into the treatment plant was metered and continuously recorded on 24-hr. charts . The raw sewage was introduced directly under the turbine aerator to insure maximum mixing of the raw sewage with the aeration tank contents . The effluent was collected through two pipes and discharged to the Blue River through a surface drainage ditch . Analyses Composite samples were collected at weekly intervals . The long retention period and the complete mixing concept prevented rapid changes in either the mixed liquor or in the effluent . Weekly samples would make any changes more readily discernible than daily samples . The composite samples were normally collected over a 6-hr. period , but an occasional 24-hr. composite was made . Examination of the operations of the shopping center permitted correlation of the 6-hr. composite samples with 24-hr. operations . The data indicated that the organic load during the 6-hr. composites was essentially 50 per cent of the 24-hr. organic load . Grab samples were collected from the existing oxidation pond to determine its operating conditions . Efforts were made to take the grab samples at random periods so that the mass of data could be treated as a 6-hr. composite sample . A single 24-hr. composite sample indicated that the sewage flow pattern and characteristics were typical . Pilot plant operations The BOD of the influent to the pilot plant varied between 110 and 710 mg/l with an average of 350 Aj . This was equivalent to 240 mg/lBOD on a 24-hr. basis . The BOD of the raw sewage was typical of domestic sewage from a subdivision . The BOD in the effluent averaged 58 mg/l , a 76-per-cent reduction over the 24-hr. period . Examination of the data in Table 1 , shows that a few samples contributed to raising the effluent Aj . The periods of high effluent BOD occurred during cold periods when operational problems with the aerator resulted . Ice caused the aerator to overload , straining the drive belts . The slippage of the drive belts caused the aerator to slow down and reduce oxygen transfer as well as the mixing of the raw sewage . The organic loading on the unit averaged 32 lb of BOD/day or about 2 lb BOD/day/1,000 cu ft aeration capacity . Needless to say , the organic load was very low on a volumetric basis , but was 270 lb BOD/day/acre on a surface loading basis . It seems that the aerated lagoon was a very heavily loaded oxidation pond or a lightly loaded activated sludge system . The flow rate remained relatively constant during the winter months as shown in Table 1 . With the spring rains the flow rose rapidly due to infiltration in open sewers . As construction progresses , the volume of storm drainage will be sharply reduced . The retention period in the aerated lagoon ranged from 9.8 to 2.6 days , averaging 6.4 days . The large amount of vegetable grindings from the grocery store in the shopping center created a suspended solids problem . The vegetables were not readily metabolized by the bacteria in the aeration unit and tended to float on the surface . A skimming device at the effluent weir prevented loss of most of these light solids . The average volatile suspended solids in the effluent was 75 mg/l while MLSS averaged 170 mg/l volatile suspended solids . The average sludge age based on displacement of solids was calculated to be 14.5 days . The oxygen uptake rate in the mixed liquor averaged 0.8 mg/l/hr during the first four months of this study . Variations in aerator speeds during the latter two months of this study caused increased mixing and increased oxygen demand . The increase in oxygen uptake rates from 1.2 to 2.6 mg/l/hr which followed an increase in rotor speed was believed to be related to resuspension of solids which had settled at the lower rotor speeds . It appeared that most of the mixed liquor suspended solids were active microbial solids with the heavier , less active solids settling out . The suspended solids discharged in the effluent were found to be the major source of the Aj . Removal of the suspended solids by a membrane filter yielded an average effluent containing only 20 mg/l Aj . The BOD in the drainage ditch receiving the pilot plant effluent averaged 12 Aj . This low BOD was due to removal of the excess suspended solids by sedimentation since the only dilution was surface runoff which was very low during this study . Microscopic examination Routine microscopic examinations were made of the mixed liquor as indicated by McKinney and Gram for the various types of protozoa . It was found that the aerated lagoon was an activated sludge system rather than an oxidation pond . At no time were algae found in the mixed liquor . The bacteria formed typical activated sludge floc . The floc particles were all small as the heavier floc settled out . Initially , the flagellated protozoa predominated , but they soon gave way to the free swimming ciliated protozoa . As the temperature decreased , the number of free swimming ciliated protozoa decreased . Very little protozoa activity existed below 40-degrees-F . When the temperature reached 32-degrees-F all protozoan activity ceased ; ; but as the temperature rose , the numbers of protozoa increased rapidly . Only once were stalked ciliates found in the mixed liquor . The predomination of free swimming ciliated protozoa is indicative of a high bacterial population . Oxygen transfer One of the important aspects of this study was to determine the oxygen transfer relationships of the mechanical aerator . Routine determinations were made for dissolved oxygen in the mixed liquor and for oxygen uptake rates . The data given in Table 2 , show the routine operation of the aerator . The dissolved oxygen in the aeration unit was consistently high until January 29 , 1961 . An extended cold spell caused ice to build up on the aerator which was mounted on a floating platform and caused the entire platform to sink lower in the water . The added resistance to the rotor damaged the drive belts and reduced the oxygen transfer capacity . It was approximately one month before the belt problem was noticed and corrected , but at no time was there a deficiency of dissolved oxygen . A series of eight special tests were conducted at different rotor speeds to determine the oxygen transfer rate . Five of the tests were conducted with a polyethylene cover to simulate an ice cover . The rate of oxygen transfer at 1.0-mg. / l. dissolved oxygen concentration and 10-degrees-C for various rotor speeds is given in Table 3 . The maximum rate of oxygen transfer at 1.0 mg/l dissolved oxygen was calculated as 220 lb/day at a maximum rate of 9.3 Aj . The actual power requirements indicated 2 lb. oxygen transfer / hr. / hp. . The polyethylene cover reduced the oxygen transfer rate by 10 per cent , indicating that the maximum oxygen transfer is at the rotor rather than through the surface . Oxidation pond During this study septic conditions developed in the oxidation pond in the spring when the ice melted . Shortly after this study ended septic conditions resulted which required the addition of sodium nitrate . The location of the oxidation pond in a high-value residential area makes odor nuisances a sensitive problem for the developer . The organic concentration in the influent raw sewage ranged from 160 to 270 mg/l of BOD with an average of 230 Aj . The BOD data are given in Table 4 . A single 24-hr. composite sample had a BOD of 260 mg/l , indicating a typical domestic sewage . The daily sewage volume to the oxidation pond averaged 147,000 gpd , giving a retention period of 42 days . The organic loading on the pond was slightly under 60 lb. BOD / day / acre . The effluent BOD averaged 34 mg/l , a little lower than that of the study at Fayette indicated for a loading of 60 lb. Aj . The BOD of the effluent ranged from a minimum of 13 to a maximum of 47 mg. / l. . Microscopic examination of the effluent showed that minimum BOD occurred when the algae began to decrease with cold weather . When the algae began to build up again , the effluent BOD rose . During the two weeks when the algae disappeared from the effluent BOD's in the effluent were 18 and 16 Aj . Thus , the three main categories of antisubmarine warfare operations are defense of shipping , defense of naval forces , and area defense . The last category overlaps the others in amphibious operations and near terminals and bases . To effect these operations , five elements exist ( 1 ) surface , ( 2 ) air , ( 3 ) mines , ( 4 ) submarine , and ( 5 ) fixed installations . Surface forces have been used to provide defense zones around naval and merchant ship formations , air to furnish area surveillance , and mines for protection of limited areas . Submarines and shore installations are new elements . The submarine now has a definite place in submarine defense particularly in denying enemy access to ocean areas . Fixed installations offer possibilities for area detection . Mine warfare is being reoriented against submarine targets . A sixth element , not always considered , is intelligence . It includes operational intelligence of the enemy and knowledge of the environment . Operational intelligence presumably will be available from our national intelligence agencies ; ; intelligence on the environment will come from the recently augmented program in oceanography . The major postwar development is the certainty that these elements should not be considered singly but in combination and as being mutually supporting . Necessity for an over-all concept Thinking on submarine defense has not always been clear-cut . Proponents of single elements tend to ensure predominance of that element without determining if it is justified , and the element with the most enthusiastic and vociferous proponents has assumed the greatest importance . Consequently , air , surface , and submarine elements overshadow the mine , fixed installations , and intelligence . These have sought more and more of what they have . Each seems to strive for elimination of the necessity for the others . This , despite postwar experience demonstrating that all elements are necessarily mutually supporting . Thus , the most productive areas are not necessarily the most stressed . This is stated to emphasize the necessity for an over-all concept of submarine defense , one which would provide positions of relative importance to ASW elements based on projected potentialities . Then the enthusiasm and energy of all elements can be channeled to produce cumulative progress toward a common objective . An over-all concept would have other advantages . It would allow presentation to the public of a unified approach . Now the problem is presented piecemeal and sometimes contradictorily . While one element is announcing progress , another is delineating its problems . The result can only be confusion in the public mind . A unified concept can serve as a guide to budgeting and , if public support is gained , will command Congressional support . Industry's main criticism of the Navy's antisubmarine effort is that it cannot determine where any one company or industry can apply its skills and know-how . Lacking guidance , industry picks its own areas . The result , coupled with the salesmanship for which American industry is famous , is considerable expenditure of funds and efforts in marginal areas . An over-all concept will guide industry where available talents and facilities will yield greatest dividends . Therefore , a broad concept of over-all submarine defense is needed for co-ordination of the Navy's efforts , for a logical presentation to the public , for industry's guidance , and as a basis for a program to the Congress . Principles involved in an over-all concept That which follows will be a discussion of principles and possible content for an over-all concept of antisubmarine warfare . Russia possesses the preponderance of submarines in the world , divided between her various fleets . Some are also in Albania and others are on loan to Egypt . Other countries which may willingly or unwillingly become Communist can furnish bases . Communist target areas can be assumed , but there is no certainty that such assumptions coincide with Soviet intentions . Attack can come from almost any direction against many locations . Logically , then , the first principle of the plan must be that it is not rigidly oriented toward any geographical area . It is often stated that the submarine can be destroyed while building , at bases , in transit , and on station . Destruction of the enemy's building and base complex , however , requires attacks on enemy territory , which is possible only in event of all-out hostilities . In transit or on station , it may not be possible to attack the submarines until commission of an overt act . The Communists are adept at utilizing hostilities short of general war and will do so whenever it is to their advantage . Therefore the second principle of the plan must be that , while providing for all-out hostilities , its effectiveness is not dependent on general war . Antisubmarine warfare does not involve clashes between large opposing forces , with the decision a result of a single battle . It is a war of attrition , of single actions , of an exchange of losses . This exchange must result in our ending up with some effective units . Initially , having fewer units of some elements -- especially submarines -- than the opponent , our capabilities need to be sufficiently greater than theirs , so that the exchange will be in our favor . Therefore , the third principle of the plan must be that it does not depend for effectiveness on engagement by the same types , unless at an assured favorable exchange rate . The submarine has increased its effectiveness by several orders of magnitude since World War 2 . Its speed has increased , it operates at increasingly greater depths , its submerged endurance is becoming unlimited , and it will become even more silent . The next developments will probably be in weaponry . The missile can gradually be expected to replace the torpedo . As detection ranges increase , weapons will be developed to attack other submarines and surface craft at these ranges . Therefore , the fourth principle of the plan must be that it provide for continuously increasing capabilities in the opponent . No element can accomplish the total objective of submarine defense . Some elements support the others , but all have limitations . Some limitations of one element can be compensated for by a capability of another . Elements used in combination will increase the over-all capability more than the sum of the capabilities of the individual elements . Therefore , the plan's fifth principle must be that it capitalize on the capabilities of all elements in combination . Conceivably the submarine defense problem can be solved by sufficient forces . Numbers would be astronomical and current fiscal policies make this an impractical solution . Shipbuilding , aircraft procurement , and weapon programs indicate that there will not be enough of anything . Therefore , any measures taken in peacetime which will decrease force requirements in war will contribute greatly to success when hostilities occur . Therefore , the sixth principle of the plan must be that it concentrate on current measures which will reduce future force requirements . The world is constantly changing ; ; what was new yesterday is obsolescent today . The seventh principle of the plan is self-evident ; ; it must be flexible enough to allow for technological breakthroughs , scientific progress , and changes in world conditions . Supporting elements in asw operations To this point the need for an over-all plan for submarine defense has been demonstrated , the mission has been stated , broad principles delineating its content laid down , and the supporting elements listed . Before considering these elements in more detail , an additional requirement should be stated . Large area coverage will accomplish all other tasks . Therefore , because reduction in tasks results in reduction of forces required , the plan should provide for expanding area coverage . But it must be remembered that the plan should not be oriented geographically . Consequently , the system giving area coverage ( if such coverage is less than world wide ) must be flexible and hence at least partially mobile . Since effective area coverage appears fairly remote , the requirement can be borne in mind while considering the elements : air , surface , sub-surface , fixed installations , mines , and intelligence . These are arranged approximately in the order of the vociferousness of their proponents but will be discussed in the reverse order in the hope that the true order of importance will result . Intelligence , as used herein , will include information on possible opponents and on the environment which can affect operations . These can be referred to as operational intelligence and environmental intelligence . In submarine defense these must have maximum stress . Good operational intelligence can ensure sound planning , greatly reduce force requirements , and increase tactical effectiveness . Environmental intelligence is just as important . The ocean presently co-operates with the target . Full knowledge of the science of oceanography can bring the environment to our side , resulting in an increase in effectiveness of equipment and tactics , a decrease in enemy capabilities , and the development of methods of capitalizing on the environment . Therefore , improved intelligence will result in reduced force requirements and , as it supports all other elements , rates a top priority . Gathering intelligence is important , but of equal importance is its translation into usable form . A program is needed to translate the results of oceanographic research into tactical and operating instructions . Approaching this problem on a statistical basis is invalid , because the opponent has the same sources available and will be encountered not under average conditions , but under the conditions most advantageous to him . Therefore , the on-the-scene commander must have detailed operating instructions based on measurement of conditions , in the area , at the time of encounter . All capabilities must be used to maximum advantage then . Temperature , wind , oxygen content , depth , bottom character , and animal life are the chief environmental variables . There may be others . Variations in sound velocity should be measured rather than temperature , because more of the variables would be encompassed . These variations must eventually be measured horizontally as well as vertically . Progress in predicting water conditions is encouraging , but little guidance is available to the man at sea on the use of such information . A concurrent effort is needed to make oceanographic data useful on the spot . Mine warfare has in the past been directed against surface targets . By its nature it has always been of great psychological advantage and small efforts have required considerably greater counter-efforts . Mines are being increasingly oriented against submarine targets . They are still considered to be for use in restricted waters , however , and targets must come within a few yards of them . Mines need to be recognized as a major element in anti-submarine warfare employment , extended to deep water , and have their effective area per unit increased . Mines can be used to deny access to great areas ; ; they are difficult to counter , cost little to maintain until required , and can be put into place quickly . A most attractive feature is that detection and attack are combined in a single package . Effective employment will reduce force requirements . For example , effective mine barriers from Florida to Cuba and across the Yucatan Channel from Cuba to Mexico would remove all requirements for harbor defense , inshore patrol , convoy escort , shipping control , and mine defense for the entire Gulf of Mexico . More extended systems , covering all passage into the Caribbean , would free the Caribbean and the Gulf of Mexico from the previously listed requirements . Systems covering the Gulf of St. Lawrence and possibly the entire coasts of the United States are not impossible . Such mine defense systems could permit concentration of mobile forces in the open oceans with consequent increase in the probability of success . The advantages inherent in mine warfare justify as great an importance for this element as is accorded any of the other elements . Fixed installations are increasingly advocated as the problem of area defense emerges . The proponents are scientific and technical men who exercise considerable influence on their military counterparts . Systems which detect submarines over wide areas are attractive , although they can be only `` burglar alarms '' . Mobile forces are required to localize and attack detected targets , since the systems are not capable of pinpointing a target . Such systems are expensive and are oriented geographically . In an over-all ASW concept , dependence on and effort expended for such systems should be limited to those with proven capabilities . No general installation should be made until a model installation has been proved and its maximum capability determined . In addition , proposals for fixed installations should be carefully weighed against a counterpart mobile system . Fixed installations will always lack the flexibility that should be inherent in naval systems . The submarine has become increasingly attractive as an antisubmarine weapon system . It operates in its target's environment , and any advantage gained therefrom by the target is shared by the attacker . But the submarine is a weapon of ambush and therefore always in danger of being ambushed . Two metabolites ( 1 , and 2 ) ) of p-aminobenzoic acid ( PABA ) which act as cofactors for the hydroxylation of aniline by acid-fast bacteria are biosynthesized from Aj . The 7 carbons of PABA are incorporated directly into metabolite 2 ( ( as shown with both ring-labeled and carboxy-labeled Af ) . Thirty-five of the 36 carbon atoms arise from Aj . All 28 carbons of metabolite 1 ( ( a product of mild acid hydrolysis of 2 ) arise from Aj . Metabolite 1 , isolated from the medium , however , showed a lower specific activity , which indicates endogenous synthesis of this metabolite . Vigorous acid hydrolysis of metabolite 1 , destroyed the biological activity of the compound and liberated two aryl amines . Fragment A has been obtained in crystalline form as a dioxalate salt and free base . Preliminary evidence tentatively indicates that the molecule ( metabolite 1 ) ) is cleaved at a secondary amide bond . ( N. H. Sloane ; ; chemical studies are being pursued with the cooperation of K.G. Untch . ) studies on esterases -- Research on esterases in mammalian sera was continued . One of the most interesting findings was the extreme sensitivity of plasma arylesterases to rare earth ions . The inhibition of the enzyme by very low concentrations of lanthanum ion is probably the strongest known biological effect of rare earth salts . Various metal ions have been found to protect plasma arylesterase against inactivation by urea and guanidine . The effects can be related to the structure of this enzyme . The non-identity of serum and red blood cell arylesterase was also established . Furthermore , the hydrolysis of paraoxon was studied in mammalian sera , and it was found that it is hydrolyzed by albumin ( or a factor attached to it ) in addition to arylesterase . Selective inhibitors can distinguish the two activities . Investigations on the acceleration of human plasma cholinesterase were carried further . ( E. G. Erdos , L. E. Boggs , C. D. Mackey ) biophysical studies on modified fibrous proteins -- Electron-microscopical and physical-chemical methods were used to demonstrate the renaturation of heat-denatured collagen and ribonucleic acid . ( R. V. Rice ) A method was devised for extracting and purifying soluble earthworm collagen ( EWC ) . It was observed that EWC macromolecules are the same diameter ( 15 a. ) but much longer ( up to several microns ) than vertebrate tropocollagen . This unusual collagen also was shown to undergo a reversible thermal phase transformation . ( R. V. Rice , M. D. Maser ) studies on peptides and peptidases -- This investigation involved several aspects . Substance Z , an active urinary peptide , was purified by extraction in organic solvents and repeated column chromatography ; ; high-voltage electrophoresis and paper chromatography were used in preliminary structural studies ; ; pharmacological effects in vitro on isolated surviving organs and in vivo on blood pressure were assayed ; ; special equipment required for registering respiration and for recording the contraction of smooth muscles under various conditions was developed by the Instruments Section ( Victor Jackman , W. C. Barnes , J. F. Reiss ) ; ; and enzymes which terminate the action of peptides such as bradykinin and perhaps Substance Z were studied . Experiments are in progress to develop ultraviolet spectrophotometric techniques for assaying these enzymes and for studying their sensitivity to metal ions . ( E. G. Erdos , C. D. Mackey , A. G. Renfrew , W. B. Severs , E. M. Sloane ) seed proteins -- In a physiochemical study of seed proteins , the globulins of the Brazil nut have been investigated . In addition to the known principal globulin , excelsin , three other ultracentrifugally distinct components have been observed . A water-soluble protein of quite low molecular weight ( ca. 10,000 ) has also been found in this system and partly characterized . ( E. F. Casassa , H. J. Notarius ) continuum mechanics and viscoelasticity theory of non-newtonian fluids -- On the basis of a differentiability assumption in function space , it is possible to prove that , for materials having the property that the stress is given by a functional of the history of the deformation gradients , the classical theory of infinitesimal viscoelasticity is valid when the deformation has been infinitesimal for all times in the past . By strengthening the differentiability assumption , it has been possible to derive second and higher order theories of viscoelasticity . In the second-order theory , one of the normal stress differences can be calculated from the first-order stress relaxation function . ( B. D. Coleman with Walter Noll , Department of Mathematics , Carnegie Institute of Technology ) viscoelastic measurements -- An extensive series of measurements was made on a high-density polyethylene in a torsion pendulum instrument using forced sinusoidal oscillation , free vibration , and creep measurements over the temperature range of Af to 80-degrees-C . As many as seven decades of the time scale were thus covered isothermally . The simple time-temperature equivalence valid for many amorphous systems did not hold here . It was possible , however , to decompose the compliance into a sum of a frequency-independent component and two viscoelastic mechanisms , each compatible with the Boltzmann superposition principle and with a consistent set of time-temperature equivalence factors . ( Hershel Markovitz , D.J. Plazek , Haruo Nakayasu ) geochemistry trace elements in tektites , meteorites , and related materials -- The results of microanalysis of tektites ( natural glasses of unknown origin ) for gallium and germanium have shown that these glasses are probably produced from terrestrial ( or less likely from lunar ) matter by impact of a celestial body . The gallium / germanium ratio is higher than that for ordinary igneous , metamorphic , or sedimentary matter as a result of selective volatilization of the components of the tektite . Gallium oxide is less volatile than silica ( the main constituent of tektites ) and germanium oxide is more volatile . Australites ( tektites from Australia ) give the appearance of a second melting . In conformity with this conclusion a higher trace gallium content was found in the portion ( flange ) that has undergone a second melting . The silicate fractions of stony meteorites show gallium / germanium ratios similar to those of tektites because they too have undergone melting at some point in their histories . Libyan Desert silica-glass , another natural glass , is composed of nearly pure silica and has the same trace germanium content as sands in the area . The gallium content , however , has been enhanced five-fold . This glass is probably formed from Libyan Desert sands by comet or stony-meteorite impact . Nickel-iron meteorites with sufficient kinetic energy to produce large terrestrial explosion craters may nevertheless melt only small quantities of material . Most of the impact energy is spent in crushing and fragmentation . When rapid quenching follows melting , impact glasses may result . These always contain metallic inclusions . Impact glasses not containing elemental nickel-iron may have been produced by stony meteorites or comets . No meteorites have ever been recovered from paleoexplosion craters , and recent craters containing impact glass have all been produced by metallic meteorites with the exception of Aouelloul crater , Adrar , Western Sahara Desert . This crater contains impact glass with no metallic inclusions and no meteoritic material has been recovered . ( A. J. Cohen , John Anania ) inorganic chemistry Preparation of a coordination compound is often accomplished by the simple method of reacting a metal salt with a ligand in a suitable solvent such as an alcohol . By applying this general principle , a great number of complex compounds of osmium , ruthenium , iridium , and rhenium , with triphenylphosphine , triphenylarsine , and triphenylstibine have been obtained in this laboratory during the past few years . ( Lauri Vaska , E. M. Sloane , J. W. DiLuzio ) In the absence of direct evidence to the contrary , decomposition of solvent alcohol and coordination of its fragments to the metal were not considered , following the above heretofore-accepted assumption in preparative coordination chemistry . Recent work with radiocarbon and deuterated alcohols as solvents , however , has given evidence that metal-hydrido and carbonyl complexes may be readily formed by reaction with alcohol in some of these systems . Some of the previously reported compounds have thus been reformulated and a series of new hydrido and carbonyl compounds discovered , the more representative examples being Af , Af , Af , Af and Af ( Af ) . The coordination complexes formed by transition metals with primary and secondary phosphines and arsines are being investigated ( R. G. Hayter ) . Particular interest is directed towards the condensation of these ligands with metal halides to form substituted phosphide or arside complexes . During the past year , these ligands have yielded some unusual five-coordinate complexes of nickel ( 2 ) and some interesting binuclear phosphorus-bridged complexes of palladium ( 2 ) ( see figure ) , as well as new compounds of the well-known type Af . The structures , properties , and reactions of these compounds are being studied . In another study chromium-substituted aluminum oxyhydroxides and related species , prepared homogeneously by high-temperature hydrolysis , are being characterized and investigated spectrally in the ultraviolet region with a view to identification and semiquantitative estimation of the phases formed under varying preparative conditions . ( J. A. Laswick , N. L. Heatwole ) structure and properties of macromolecules elasticity of macromolecular networks -- The theory of elasticity of Gaussian networks has been developed on a more general basis and the equations of state relating variables of pressure , volume , temperature , stress and strain have been precisely formulated . Simple elongation has been treated in detail . The various stress-temperature coefficients for constancy of volume and strain , constancy of pressure and strain , and constancy of pressure and length have been interrelated . The dilation accompanying elongation and the simultaneously developed anisotropy of compressibility have been related to the elongation . In continuation of these theoretical studies , a more precise elucidation of the effects of imperfections in network structure is sought . ( P. J. Flory , C. A. J. Hoeve ) chain conformations of polymeric chains -- Recent theoretical work to calculate the dimensions of polymeric chains by Volkenstein and Lifson has been extended to include more general types of chains . The mean-square end-to-end distance of the polyisobutylene chain has been calculated in reasonable agreement with values deduced from viscosity data . These studies are being extended to different polymers to increase our knowledge about the hindrances to rotation around chain bonds . ( C. A. J. Hoeve , A. A. Blumberg ) crystallization in polymers and copolymers -- The crystallization of copolymers comprising Af units interspersed with a minor percentage of Af is limited by the inability of the crystal lattice characteristic of the former to accommodate the bulky side group of the latter . Only uninterrupted sequences of the former are eligible for formation of crystallites . Limitations on the lengths of these sequences diminish the stability of the comparatively short crystallites which can be formed , and this is reflected in a broadening of the melting range . ( Robert Chiang , J. B. Jackson , P. J. Flory ) Carefully executed melting studies on this system ( M. J. Richardson ) permit quantitative estimation of the instability engendered by reduced crystallite length . The complex morphology of polycrystalline homopolymers is necessarily dependent on the same factor . Hence , the present studies offer a possible basis for interpretations in the latter field . Contraction of muscle -- Glycerinated muscle , in the presence of the physiological agent ( ATP ) responsible for delivering energy to the mechanochemically active proteins of muscle , has been shown to undergo a contraction which is highly sensitive both to temperature and to solvent composition in mixtures of alcohols and water . Experiments carried out over long periods of time in order to allow establishment of a steady state have shown that the onset of contraction and its completion are confined to an interval of several degrees Centigrade and to a concentration range of only several per cent . The contraction therefore partakes of the character of a phase transition . While ATP appears to be necessary for the occurrence of contraction , its presence and enzymatic hydrolysis of it by the muscle protein myosin are not the only criteria for contraction . ( C. A. J. Hoeve , P. J. Flory ) anionic Polymerization -- One of the principal aims of anionic polymerization techniques is the synthesis of polymers of extremely narrow molecular weight distribution . A simple process for the preparation of nearly monodisperse polystyrene of predictable molecular weight has been developed . The preparation of such products is not new , but the systems heretofore employed in polymerizations have commanded considerable experimental skill and starting materials of a high purity . In the new process impurities present in the solvent ( benzene ) , the monomer , and in the reaction system which would cause deactivation of propagation centers , are rendered inactive prior to polymerization by gradual addition of initiator , a mixture of butyl-lithium and telomeric styryl-lithium , at a temperature low enough to suppress chain growth . Upon completion of the purging step , additional initiator appropriate for the molecular weight of the sample desired is added , and the system is then warmed to the polymerization temperature , at which the reaction is allowed to go to completion . The predictability of the molecular weights was found to be within 10% for the polymers prepared , with Af ratios less than 1.1 . Contrary to observations with ethers , no apparent change of the reactivity of the chain ends takes place over considerable periods of time in benzene as solvent . Organization : In this publication measurements of interfacial angles of crystals are used to classify and identify chemical substances . T. V. Barker , who developed the classification-angle system , was about to begin the systematic compilation of the index when he died in 1931 . The compilation work was undertaken by a number of interested crystallographers in the Department of Mineralogy of the University Museum at Oxford . Since 1948 the working headquarters has been the Department of Geology and Mineralogy . Numerous cooperating individuals in Great Britain , Holland , the United States , and Belgium have contributed editorially or by making calculations . Great interest and practical help have been given by the Barker Index Committee . Financial and material help have come from academic , governmental , and industrial organizations in England and Holland . Editors for Volumes 1 , and 2 , were M. W. Porter and the late R. C. Spiller , both of Oxford University . A third volume remains to be published . Substances : Volume 1 , deals with 2991 compounds belonging to the tetragonal , hexagonal and trigonal , and orthorhombic systems ; ; and Volume 2 , , with about 3500 monoclinic substances . Volume 3 , , in preparation , will treat the anorthic compounds described in Groth's Chemische Krystallographie . Properties : The Barker system is based on the use of the smallest number of interfacial angles necessary for indexing purposes . Other morphological , physical , and optical property values are also given . Sources of data : The index is essentially a new treatment of previously compiled morphological data . Most of the data used are from Groth's Chemische Krystallographie . Criticality : Every calculation has been made independently by two workers and checked by one of the editors . Use of nomenclature , symbols , units , physical constants : Accepted crystallographic symbolism has been used ; ; other symbols related to the index necessarily have been introduced . Currency : This publication covers the old literature ( Groth ) ; ; there is no mechanism for keeping the volumes up to date . Format : The publication form is that of clothbound books . The data are presented in lists and tables . Part 1 in both volumes is labeled `` Introduction And Tables '' . The tables include those for the classification angles , refractive indices , and melting points of the various types of crystals . Part 2 of Volume 1 , and Parts 2 and 3 of Volume 2 , contain the crystal descriptions . These are grouped into sections according to the crystal system , and within each section compounds are arranged in the same order as in Groth's Chemische Krystallographie . An alphabetical list of chemical and mineralogical names with reference numbers enables one to find a particular crystal description . References to the data sources are given in the crystal descriptions . Publication and distribution : The Barker index is published for the Barker Index Committee by W. Heffer & Sons , Ltd. , 4 Petty Cury , Cambridge , England . Volume 1 , containing Parts 1 and 2 was published in 1951 ; ; Volume 2 , , in three parts , in 1956 . The two volumes are available from the publisher for $16.80 and $28.00 , respectively . 2-2 . Crystal data organization : The present edition of crystal data was written by J.D.H. Donnay , the Johns Hopkins University , Baltimore , Md. ( Part 2 ) ) and Werner Nowacki , University of Berne , Switzerland ( Part 1 ) ) with the collaboration of Gabrielle Donnay , U. S. Geological Survey , Washington , D. C. . Many collaborators in the United States and Switzerland helped in collecting and assembling data , in making calculations , and in editing . Support came from academic and industrial groups in these two countries . The Geological Society of America gave a grant-in-aid to complete the work and bore the expenses of publication . Preparation of a second edition is in progress under the sponsorship of the Crystal Data Committee of the American Crystallographic Association . Coeditors are J.D.H. Donnay , G. E. Cox of Leeds University , and Olga Kennard of the National Council for Medical Research , London . Financial grants have been received from the National Science Foundation and the ( British ) Institute of Physics for the compilation work and the publication costs . The continuity of the project is suggested by plans for an eventual third edition . Substances : Elements , alloys , inorganic and organic compounds . ( Metal data will not be included in the second edition , since these have been collected independently by W. B. Pearson , National Research Council , Ottawa , and published as A handbook of lattice spacings and structures of metals and alloys by Pergamon Press . ) properties : Crystallographic data resulting mainly from X-ray and electron diffraction measurements are presented . Cell dimensions , number of formula units per cell , space group , and specific gravity are given for all substances . For some substances , auxiliary properties such as the melting point are given . Sources of data : Part 1 , of the present edition covers the literature to mid-1948 ; ; Part 2 , , up to the end of 1951 . Much of the material comes directly from secondary sources such as Strukturbericht . Criticality : The vast number of compounds to be covered , the limited resources to do the job , and the immediate need for this type of compilation precluded a thorough evaluation of all available data in the present edition . Future editions may be more critical . Use of nomenclature , symbols , units , physical constants : Since Parts 1 , and 2 , were prepared independently , the abbreviation schemes and the chemical symbols used differ in the two parts . The second edition should have greater uniformity . Currency : A second edition is in preparation , and there are long range plans for a third . Format : Data in the present edition are presented in tables and lists . Part 1 , deals with the classification of crystalline substances by space groups and is not a numerical data compilation . The compounds are divided according to composition into seven categories . Part 2 , contains determinative tables for the identification of crystalline substances . These are arranged according to crystal system . There are formula and name indexes covering both parts . References for Part 1 , are given at the end and for Part 2 , in the tables . Publication and distribution : The present edition of crystal data ( Af ) , published in 1954 as Memoir 60 of the Geological Society of America , is now out of print . The manuscript of the second edition will probably be ready by the end of 1960 . 2-3 . Crystal Structures organization : The author of Crystal Structures is Ralph W.G. Wyckoff , University of Arizona , Tucson , Arizona . The first section of this publication appeared in 1948 and the last supplement in 1960 . Though now complete , the publication is included in this directory because of its importance and because of the long-term nature of its preparation . Substances : Elements , inorganic and organic compounds ( no alloys ) . Properties : The data presented are derived almost entirely from X-ray diffraction measurements and include atomic coordinates , cell dimensions , and atomic and ionic radii . Sources of data : Published literature . Criticality : The aim was to state the results of all available determinations of atomic positions in crystals . Presumably the tabulated data are best available values . The critical comments in the textual sections of this publication are invaluable . Use of nomenclature , symbols , units , physical constants : The terminology used conforms to that of Internationale Tabellen Zur Bestimmung Von Kristallstrukturen . Currency : During the years of publication , supplement and replacement sheets were issued periodically . Coverage of the literature extends through 1954 and includes some 1955 references . It is to be hoped that some way will be found to keep this important work current . Format : The publication form is that of loose-leaf sheets ( Af ) contained in binders . The book is divided into chapters and in each chapter the material is grouped into Text , Tables , Illustrations , and Bibliography . Each group is paginated separately ; ; numbers sometimes followed by letters are used so that insertions can be made . Inorganic structures are found in Chapters 2 - 12 , organic structures in Chapters 13 - 15 . Within each chapter an effort has been made to group together those crystals with similar structures . There are three indexes , i.e. , an inorganic formula index , a mineralogical name index , and a name index to organic compounds . Publication and distribution : Publisher of Crystal Structures is Interscience Publishers , 250 Fifth Avenue , New York 1 , N. Y. . The work consists of four sections and 5 supplements . Price of the complete work including all necessary binders is $148.50 . 2-4 . Dana's System Of Mineralogy organization : Six editions of James Dwight Dana's System appeared between 1837 and 1892 . In 1915 Edward S. Dana , editor of the sixth edition , asked W. E. Ford of Yale University to prepare a seventh edition of his father's work . A number of people became involved in the preparation but work was slow until 1937 . In that year a grant was obtained from the Penrose Fund of the Geological Society of America to finance additional full-time workers . Money was also advanced by the publishers , John Wiley & Sons , Inc. . Volume 1 , was completed in 1941 and published in 1944 . The editors of this volume and Volume 2 , were the late Charles Palache , Clifford Frondel , and the late Harry Berman , all of Harvard University . Work on Volume 2 , was begun in 1941 , interrupted by the war in 1942 , and resumed in 1945 . The volume was completed in 1950 and published in 1951 . A supplementary grant from the Geological Society of America helped finance its publication . Besides the editors there were many contributors in the United States and Great Britain to Volumes 1 , and 2 . W. E. Ford , for example , continued to supply data on the occurrence of minerals until his death in 1939 . Volume 3 , is nearing completion and there are plans to revise Volume 1 . The project is currently supported by Harvard University . Substances : minerals . Properties : Crystallographic , physical , optical , and chemical properties . The crystallographic data given include interaxial angles and unit cell dimensions ; ; the physical property values include hardness , melting point , and specific gravity . Sources of data : Almost entirely original articles in journals ; ; abstracts and other compilations on rare occasions when original papers are not available . Criticality : All information is carefully appraised and uncertain facts are designated by ( '?' . ) An authentic diffraction pattern is always obtained and optical properties are frequently checked . Use of nomenclature , symbols , units , physical constants : Recommendations of international authorities , such as the International Union of Crystallography , are followed . There is a complete synonymy at the beginning of each species description . Currency : Currency in the usual sense cannot be maintained in an undertaking of this sort . Format : The data are presented in text and tables in bound volumes . Volume 1 , of the seventh edition contains an introduction and data for eight classes of minerals ; ; Volume 2 , contains data for forty-two classes . References are given at the end of each mineral description and a general index is given at the end of each volume . There will be a comprehensive index in Volume 3 , covering all three volumes . Publication and distribution : Volume 1 ( ( Af ) of the seventh edition of Dana's System Of Mineralogy was published in 1944 and Volume 2 ( ( Af ) in 1951 by John Wiley & Sons , Inc. , New York , N. Y. . ( The association of Wiley & Sons with the Dana Mineralogies dates back to 1844 when they published the second edition of the system . ) The two volumes are available from the publisher for $14.00 and $16.00 , respectively . 2-5 . The Groth Institute organization : `` The Groth Institute '' , which was established in 1958 , is a group activity affiliated with the Physics Department of The Pennsylvania State University , University Park , Pa. . Ray Pepinsky is the Director . The Institute derives its name from Paul Von Groth's Chemische Krystallographie , a five-volume work which appeared between 1906 and 1919 . The resident staff is large and consists of professional assistants , graduate students , abstractors , librarian , technical editor , machine operators , secretarial help , and others . There are also corresponding members and outside advisory groups . The Air Force Office of Scientific Research has provided financial assistance in the early stages of the Institute's program . Substances : All crystalline substances and other solid-state materials . Properties : The aim is to collect a very broad range of physical , chemical , morphological , and structural data for crystals on an encyclopedic scale and to seek all possible useful and revealing correlations of properties with internal structure . Sources of data : The first stage of operation has centered on the literature imaging of critical or summarizing tabulations such as the Barker Index . Coverage of primary literature will follow . Unpublished data will be available to the Groth institute from cooperating groups and individuals . Criticality : Critical evaluation of all data compiled is not a primary aim of this project . However , the proposed correlation of the many interrelated properties of crystals will reveal discrepancies in the recorded data and suggest areas for reinvestigation . In addition , the availability of computers will permit recalculation and refinement of much structural information . Use of nomenclature , symbols , units , physical constants : For punched-card or tape storage of information all literature values must be conformed to a common language . In this way a degree of unification of nomenclature , symbols , and units will be realized . Because individual classes of foods differ in their requirements for preservation , a number of methods have been developed over the years involving one or a combination of procedures such as dehydration , fermentation , salting , chemical treatment , canning , refrigeration , and freezing . The basic objectives in each instance are to make available supplies of food during the intervals between harvesting or slaughter , to minimize losses resulting from the action of microorganisms and insects , and to make it possible to transport foods from the area of harvest or production to areas of consumption . In earlier years , the preservation of food was essentially related to survival . In the more sophisticated atmosphere of today's developed nations , food-preservation techniques have sought also to bring variety , peak freshness , and optimum taste and flavor in foods at reasonable cost to the consumer . With the development of nuclear technology , isotopic materials , and machine radiation sources in recent years , the possibilities of applying ionizing radiation to the preservation of foods attracted the attention of investigators in the United States and throughout the world . An early hope that irradiation might be the ultimate answer to practically all food preservation problems was soon dispelled . Interest remained , however , in the possibility that it would serve as a useful supplementary method for counteracting spoilage losses and for preserving some foods at lower over-all costs than freezing , or without employing heat or chemicals with their attendant taste alterations . Factors responsible for the spoilage of foods The chief factors responsible for the spoilage of fresh foodstuffs are ( 1 ) microorganisms such as bacteria , molds , and yeasts , ( 2 ) enzymes , ( 3 ) insects , ( 4 ) sprouting , and ( 5 ) chemical reactions . Microorganisms are often responsible for the rapid spoilage of foods . Of special concern is the growth of bacteria such as Clostridium botulinum which generate poisonous products . Enzymatic action in stored food produces changes which can adversely affect the appearance of food or its palatability . Spoilage by chemical action results from the reaction of one group of components in the food with others or with its environment , as in corrosion of the walls of metal containers or the reaction of fats with oxygen in the air to produce rancidity . Sprouting is a naturally occurring phenomenon in stored potatoes , onions , carrots , beets , and similar root vegetables . Insect infestation is a problem of importance chiefly in stored grain . The presence of parasitic organisms such as Trichinella spiralis in pork introduces another factor which must be dealt with in food processing . To permit the storage of food for long periods of time , a method of preservation must accomplish the destruction of microorganisms and inhibition of enzymatic action . The term `` sterilization '' applies to methods involving essentially complete destruction of all microorganisms . Food treated in this manner and protected from recontamination by aseptic methods of packaging and containment presumably could be stored for long periods without refrigeration . The process of `` pasteurization '' involves milder and less prolonged heat treatment which accomplishes the destruction of most , but not all , of the microorganisms . Less severe thermal treatment as by blanching or scalding serves to inactivate enzymes . General effects of ionizing radiation Ionizing radiation can cause the destruction of microorganisms and insects involved in food spoilage or , at lower doses , can inhibit their action . It furnishes a means of destroying insects in stored grain products as well as certain parasitic organisms present in meats . Deactivation of enzymes is also possible , although some types require extremely heavy doses of 10 Mrad or more . Because of undesirable flavors , odors , colors , and generally low palatability associated with radiation treatment of this magnitude , the inactivation of enzymes is best accomplished prior to irradiation by the conventional heat-processing methods of blanching . Radiation does not retard the chemical spoilage of food . It will , however , inhibit the sprouting of potatoes and other root vegetables . The radiation doses required for the preservation of foods are in the following ranges : 1 . For radiosterilization , to destroy all organisms for long-term preservation -- about 4.5 Mrad for nonacid foods of low salt content . 2 . For radiopasteurization , to partially destroy microorganisms ; ; results vary with types of food , storage conditions , and objectives of treatment -- commonly of the order of 0.2 Mrads but up to about 0.8 Aj . 3 . For destruction of insects -- about 25,000 Aj . 4 . For inhibiting the sprouting of root vegetables -- 4,000 to 10,000 Aj . Preserving foods with ionizing radiation leads to some undesirable side effects , particularly at the higher radiation dosages . In this respect , the general palatability and individual acceptance of most radiosterilized foods has , to date , been found to be low in comparison with fresh and commercially processed foods . A number of foods are quite acceptable as regards taste and palatability , however , at dosages substantially less than sterilization levels . Moreover , the nutritive value of irradiated foods apparently undergoes little , if any , change , although some of the fat-soluble vitamins are affected by sterilization doses . Radiation sources For irradiation of food , the results obtained depend upon the dose rather than the specific type of radiation , and X-ray , gamma , and high-energy electron radiation are suitable . Aside from availability and economic considerations , each has certain practical advantages ; ; for example , gamma rays give deeper penetration but cannot be focused or collimated , whereas unidirectional electron beams may be split and directed to both the top and bottom of the food package to be irradiated . Selection of a source for commercial irradiation would involve consideration of numerous factors including required dose rate , load factor , throughput , convenience , safety , and most important , costs . Of the potentially useful sources of ionizing radiations , gamma sources , cobalt-60 , cesium-137 , fission products , or a reactor irradiation loop system using a material such as an indium salt have received most attention for food-preservation systems . Of the various particle accelerators , the Van De Graff machines , resonant transformers , and linear accelerators are the principal ones available for commercial use . Costs of the effective energy produced by these sources is a major obstacle in the development of food-preservation processes . Estimated production costs of radiation energy from machine and nuclide sources range from $1 to $10 per Aj . Conventional energy for processing foods is available in the range of at most a few cents per kwhr for electric power and the equivalent of a few mills per kwhr for process steam . Radiation , therefore , is at an initial cost disadvantage even though only 1 to 10 per cent as much radiation energy as heat energy is required for radiopasteurization or radiosterilization . What are the possibilities of lowered radiation production costs for the future ? ? It has been estimated that for applications on a megawatt scale costs might reach values in the neighborhood of 10 cents per kwhr for large-scale accelerators or for gamma radiation generated in a reactor core . No comparable reductions in the cost of nuclide radiation are foreseen . Such projections , however , appear highly speculative and the capacities involved are far beyond those foreseen for food-preservation facilities . Because agricultural activities are seasonal and the areas of production and harvest of many foods are widely scattered geographically , and because of the high cost of transporting bulk food items any substantial distance to a central processing location , the use of large central processing stations , where low-cost radiation facilities approaching the megawatt range might be utilized , is inherently impracticable . Present status of irradiation preservation of foods The objective of complete sterilization of foods is to produce a wholesome and palatable product capable of being stored without refrigeration for extended periods of time . Chief interest in radiosterilization resides in the military services . For them , providing appetizing food under battle or emergency conditions is a paramount consideration . They require completely sterile foods capable of being stored without refrigeration , preferably items already cooked and ready to eat . High nutritional value , variety , palatability , and appetizing appearance are important for reasons of morale . Foods for rear stations , which require cooking , but no refrigeration , are also of interest . Of primary interest are meats . Radiopasteurization , which produces fewer adverse sensory changes in food products , has potential usefulness in prolonging the keeping qualities of fresh and refrigerated food items . Thus , food so processed might reach more remote markets and permit the consumer to enjoy more produce at peak freshness and palatability . Commercial interest is chiefly in this type of treatment , as is military interest under peacetime conditions . The present status of food preservation by ionizing radiation is discussed by food classes in the following paragraphs . Meats The radiation processing of meat has received extensive investigation . To date , the one meat showing favorable results at sterilization doses is pork . Of particular interest to the military services is the demonstration that roast pork , after radiosterilization , is superior in palatability to available canned pork products . Tests with beef have been largely unsuccessful because of the development of off-flavors . A prime objective of the Army Quartermaster Corps program is to find the reasons for beef's low palatability and means of overcoming it , since it is a major and desirable dietary item . Partly because low-level heat treatment is needed to inactivate enzymes before radiosterilization , treated fresh meats have the appearance of boiled or canned meat . Off-flavor is a less severe problem with the radiopasteurization of meats , but problems of commercial acceptability remain . Moderate radiation doses of from 100,000 to 200,000 rads can extend the shelf life ( at 35 F ) of fresh beef from 5 days to 5 or 6 weeks . However , the problem of consumer acceptability remains . The preradiation blanching process discolors the treated beef and liquid accumulates in prepackaged cuts . Cooked beef irradiated in the absence of oxygen assumes an unnatural pink color . When lamb and mutton are irradiated at substerilization doses , the meat becomes dehydrated , the fat becomes chalky , and , again , unnatural changes in color occur . Ground meats such as fresh pork sausage and hamburger have a relatively short shelf life under refrigeration , and radiopasteurization might be thought to offer distinctly improved keeping qualities . However , a major problem here is one of scale of processing ; ; ground meats are usually prepared from scrap meats at the local level , whereas irradiation at economic volumes of production would require central processing and distribution facilities . The problems of color change by blanching and liquid accumulation within the package are the same as for solid cuts . Specialty cooked items containing meat portions , as in `` frozen dinners '' might offer a potential use for radiopasteurization . The principal potential advantage would be that the finished product could be transported and stored at lower cost under refrigeration instead of being frozen . A refrigerated item could also be heated and served in less time than is required for frozen foods of the same type . Competitive processes for preserving meats are by canning and freezing . Costs of canning meat are in the range of 0.8 to 5 cents per pound ; ; costs of freezing are in the area of 2 to 3.5 cents per pound . The table on page 10 shows costs of canning and freezing meat , and estimated costs for irradiation under certain assumed conditions . Under the conditions of comparison , it will be noted that : ( 1 ) Radiosterilization ( at 3 Mrad ) is more expensive than canning , particularly for the cesium-137 source . ( 2 ) Radiopasteurization by either the electron accelerator or cesium-137 source is in the range of freezing costs . ( 3 ) Irradiation using the nuclide source is more expensive than use of an electron accelerator . Poultry Results of irradiation tests with poultry have been quite successful . At sterilizing doses , good palatability results , with a minimum of changes in appearance , taste , and odor . Radiopasteurization has also been successful , and the shelf life of chicken can be extended to a month or more under refrigerated storage as compared with about 10 days for the untreated product . Acceptable taste and odor are retained by the irradiated and refrigerated chicken . Acceptance of radiopasteurization is likely to be delayed , however , for two reasons : ( 1 ) the storage life of fresh chicken under refrigeration is becoming a minimal problem because of constantly improved sanitation and distributing practices , and ( 2 ) treatment by antibiotics , a measure already approved by the Federal Food and Drug Administration , serves to extend the storage life of chicken at a low cost of about 0.5 cents per pound . Seafood Fresh seafood products are extremely perishable . Although refrigeration has served to extend the storage life of these products , substantially increased consumption might be possible if areas remote from the seacoast could be served adequately . Furthermore , it has made an exact assessment of the removal mechanisms possible . The instrument is shown in Fig. 1 and consists essentially of a hard , sharp , tungsten carbide knife which is pushed along the substrate to remove the coating . The force required to accomplish removal is plotted , by means of an electronic recorder , against distance of removal . Since the removal force is a function of coating thickness , a differential transformer pickup has been incorporated into the instrument to accurately measure film thickness . This , too , is recorded against distance by a repeat run over the same track previously cut . A number of adjustment features are included in the Hesiometer to facilitate measurement and permit ready removal of coatings deposited on such substrates as iron and other metals , glass , wood , and plastic surfaces . The measurement of topcoats on primers can also readily be carried out . Hesiometer results have been found to compare excellently with manual knife scratching tests . The instrumental method , however , is about 100 times more sensitive and yields numerical results which can be accurately repeated at will over a period of time . If a wedge-shaped coating of increasing thickness is removed from a substrate by an instrument like the Hesiometer with a knife of constant rake angle , a number of removal mechanisms are often observed which depend upon the thickness of the coating . At low thicknesses a cutting ( or shearing ) phenomenon is often encountered . As the coating becomes thicker , the cutting may abruptly change to a cracking type of failure . If the coating becomes still thicker , a peeling type failure finally can occur . The typical appearance of these various mechanisms is illustrated in Figs. 2 , 3 , and 4 , which are single frame enlargements of high speed movies taken during the course of the knife removal process . It can be seen from Fig. 2 that the cutting removal of a coating from its substrate involves pure cohesive failure of the coating . The molecular forces holding the coating to the substrate are obviously greater than the cohesive strength of the coating and failure occurs by shear along a plane starting at the tip of the knife and extending to the coating surface . The pictures of Figs. 3 and 4 show the cracking and peeling types of removal where the coating is detached by failure in a region at , or close to , the interface between coating and substrate . If the force required to remove the coatings is plotted against film thickness , a graph as illustrated schematically in Fig. 5 may characteristically result . Here , H is the coatings removal force measured parallel to the surface of the substrate and T is the film thickness . It can be seen that the force is characteristic of the removal process and changes abruptly from cutting to cracking to peeling removal . Also , it can be readily seen that the cutting and peeling types of failure show a steady state response , while the cracking mechanism is of a dynamic nature . It should be recalled that these three mechanisms can occur on the same coating deposited upon the same substrate merely as a function of changes in coatings thickness . Presumably the interfacial bond strength and gross cohesive properties are identical in each case . What then , are the factors that contribute to these phenomena ? ? Why should the `` practical adhesion '' of a coating as assessed by a knife method change , initially increasing rather rapidly and then decreasing stepwise to very low values as the knife is forced through a coating of increasing thickness ? ? Cutting mechanism of cohesive failure The cutting ( or shearing ) removal process has been previously described . It was found that the coating is separated from its substrate entirely by cohesive failure . The details of the removal process are shown schematically in Fig. 6 . The various forces result from the reaction of the removed paint chip against the face of the knife and along the shear plane , which makes an angle **yf with the substrate . The action and reaction forces are R and Af , respectively , and are equal and opposite in direction . All the other force vectors are derived from these . Af is the force required to cut a coating of thickness T from the substrate . Af is the shear force along the shear plane ; ; Af and Af are the thrust forces acting against coating and knife , respectively ; ; Af is the normal compressive force acting on the shear plane ; ; Af is the friction force between chip and knife surfaces , and P is the normal force acting on the face of the knife . **yc is the rake angle of the knife ; ; **yf is the angle the shear plane makes with the substrate ; ; **yt is the friction angle ; ; and **yb is the angle the resultants make with the plane of the substrate . An analysis of the vector relationships shows that the rake angle **yc and the friction angle **yt determine the vector direction Af of the force resultants R and Af . Consequently , both the rake angle of the knife as well as the friction occurring between the back of the removed coating and the front of the knife will determine in large part the detailed mechanism of the cutting removal process . It is difficult to measure the direction and magnitude of R directly . In actual practice , the values most readily amenable to measurement are the cutting force Af and the shear angle Aj . These two values and the rake angle **yc are sufficient to determine the other parameters of these relationships . **yc is defined by the geometry of the knife ; ; **yf can readily be determined by measuring the thickness of the coating before and after cutting from the substrate ; ; Af is instrumentally determined . From Fig. 6 the relationship between these parameters can readily be derived and the cutting force is Af where **yl is the shear strength of the coating and is a parameter of the coatings material , W is the width of the removed coating and T is its thickness . If the cutting force , Af , is plotted against film thickness , a straight line should result passing through the origin and having slope Af . However , in the actual assessment of the cutting force by instrumental methods for any thickness of coating a number of spurious effects occur which must be taken into account and which make the measured value larger than the true cutting force indicated by eqn. ( 1 ) . Blunt knife One of these is the fact that the knife employed , no matter how well sharpened , will have a slightly rounded cutting edge . This signifies that **yc , the rake angle , is no longer a constant to zero film thickness . The curvature of this bluntness is , in the case of the Carboloy knife employed in the Hesiometer , determined by the grain sizes of the polished grit and the tungsten carbide crystals cemented together in the knife body and is in the order of 0.1 to 0.2 mil. . The force vector concept of Fig. 6 can readily be applied to this condition also . Because the rake angle Af at the tip of the knife is very much smaller ( or even negative ) when compared to the value of **yc for the major portion of the knife , a very rapid increase in cutting force with thickness will result . This reduces to the relationship : Af , where Af is the intercept at zero thickness of the extrapolation of the slope indicated in eqn. ( 1 ) , Af is the thickness of the coating equivalent to the rounding off of the knife tip , Af is a straight line first approximation of this roundness , and the other symbols are equivalent to those of eqn. ( 1 ) . It can be seen that Af is a constant , and is determined for the most part by the geometry of the knife . The blunter the knife , the higher is the value of Af . The importance of a hard , abrasion-resistant knife material like the Carboloy employed in the Hesiometer immediately becomes apparent . Softer knives would blunt very rapidly , making the value of Af inexact . In extreme cases of very soft knives this value may even change during the course of a measurement . Knife friction A second factor which enters into the practical measurement of the instrumentally determined cutting force is the frictional resistance caused by the bottom of the knife against the substrate . This is not a constant value like Af , but varies with the thickness of the coating and the direction and magnitude of the resultants R and Af of Fig. 6 . Under equilibrium conditions of cutting the chip exerts a thrust Af against the knife which tends to push it into the substrate or lift it away from the substrate depending on the vector direction of Af . The resultant friction force , Af is thus directly proportional to Af and consequently also to film thickness . The value of Af can readily be assessed by determining the frictional force exerted on the knife while running over the previously stripped coating track under various external loadings . A straight line relationship is usually observed in a plot of Af against load L , having slope k , and Af . Since the load L , under actual cutting conditions is caused by Af , it can be seen that Af . The measured force , H , in cutting removal of coatings from their substrates consequently can be seen to be the sum of that force required to cut the coating , Af , that due to the bluntness of the knife , Af , and that due to the friction between the bottom of the knife and the substrate , Af , or Af . The first two forces are directly interrelated and depend upon film thickness , whereas Af is independent of these two and is a constant for a given knife/coating combination . These theoretical relationships are more clearly illustrated in Fig. 7 and their sum can be seen to correlate in form with practical measurements made with the Hesiometer as illustrated in the first portion of Fig. 5 for the cutting mechanism . Chipping mechanism of cohesive failure Although a large number of coatings systems , particularly at low thicknesses fail cohesively by the cutting mechanism , frequently a second type of cohesive failure may also take place . This is a chipping , dynamic type failure encountered with very brittle coatings resins or very highly pigmented films . This is shown in the photomicrograph of Fig. 8 . The basic difference between the continuous cutting mechanism and that of the chipping mechanism is that instead of shear occurring in the coating ahead of the knife continuously without fracture , rupture intermittently occurs along the shear plane . The detailed mechanisms of this type of failure have been studied extensively by Merchant for metal cutting , and the principles found can be directly applied to coatings . By studying high speed movies made of this type of failure , the sequence of relationships as schematically illustrated in Fig. 9 could be observed . In the first picture ( 9a ) the knife is just beginning to advance into the inclined surface which was left from the previous chip formation . In the next , the shear plane angle is high , and extends to the inclined work surface . With increasing advance of the knife into the coating the shear plane extends to the coatings surface and the shear angle rapidly decreases . Eventually , rupture occurs along the shear plane ( 9e ) , and the cycle repeats itself . Merchant has found that the same basic relationships which describe the geometry and force systems in the case of the cutting mechanism can also be applied to the discontinuous chip formation provided the proper values of instantaneous shear angle and instantaneous chip thickness or cross-sectional area are used . Consequently , if the shear angle **yf is replaced by the rupture angle Af , the relationships as described in eqns. ( 1 ) , ( 2 ) , ( 4 ) , and ( 6 ) will directly apply . The cracking mechanism Under equilibrium cutting conditions , the chip exerts a force Af against the coating and an equal opposite force Af against the knife in the plane of the substrate as shown in Fig. 6 . If the rake angle **yc of the knife is high enough and the friction angle **yt between the front of the knife and the back of the chip is low enough to give a positive value for Af , the resultant vector R will lie above the plane of the substrate . Within only a few years , foamed plastics materials have managed to grow into an integral , and important , phase of the plastics industry -- and the end is still not yet in sight . Urethane foam , as only one example , was only introduced commercially in this country in 1955 . Yet last year's volume probably topped 100 million lb. and expectations are for a market of 275 million lb. by 1964 . Many of the other foamed plastics , particularly the styrenes , show similar growth potential . And there are even newer foamed plastics that are yet to be evaluated . As this issue goes to press , for example , one manufacturer has announced an epoxy foam with outstanding buoyancy and impact strength ; ; another reports that a cellular polypropylene , primarily for use in wire coating applications , is being investigated . On the following pages , each of the major commercial foamed plastics is described in detail , as to properties , applications , and methods of processing . It might be well to point out , however , some of the newer developments that have taken place within the past few months which might have a bearing on the future of the various foamed plastics involved . In urethane foams , for example , there has been a definite trend toward the polyether-type materials ( which are now available in two-component rigid foam systems ) and the emphasis is definitely on one-shot molding . Most manufacturers also seem to be concentrating on formulating fire-resistant or self-extinguishing grades of urethane foam that are aimed specifically at the burgeoning building markets . Urethane foam as an insulator is also coming in for a good deal of attention . In one outstanding example , Whirlpool Corp. found that by switching to urethane foam insulation , they could increase the storage capacity of gas refrigerators to make them competitive with electric models . Much interest has also been expressed in new techniques for processing the urethane foams , including spraying , frothing , and molding ( see article , p. 391 for details ) . And in meeting the demands for urethane foam as a garment interlining , new adhesives and new methods of laminating foam to a substrate have been developed . New techniques for automatic molding of expandable styrene beads have helped boost that particular material into a number of new consumer applications , including picnic chests , beverage coolers , flower pots , and flotation-type swimming toys . Two other end-use areas which contributed to expandable styrene's growth during the year were packaging ( molded inserts replacing complicated cardboard units ) and foamed-core building panels . Extruded expandable styrene film or sheet -- claimed to be competitive price-wise with paper -- also showed much potential , particularly for packaging . Sandwich panels for building utility shelters that consist of kraft paper skins and rigid styrene foam cores also aroused interest in the construction field . In vinyl foam , the big news was the development of techniques for coating fabrics with the material ( for details , see P. 395 ) . Better `` hand '' , a more luxurious feel , and better insulating properties were claimed to be the result . Several companies also saw possibilities in using the technique for extruding or molding vinyl products with a slight cellular core that would reduce costs yet would not affect physical properties of the end product to any great extent . Readers interested in additional information on foams are referred to the Foamed Plastics Chart appearing in the Technical Data section and to the list of references which appears below . Urethane foams Since the mid 1950s , when urethane foam first made its appearance in the American market , growth has been little short of fantastic . Present estimates are that production topped the 100-million-lb. mark in 1960 ( 85 to 90 million lb. for flexible , 10 or 11 million lb. for rigid ) ; ; by 1965 , production may range from 200 to 350 million lb. for flexible and from 115 to 150 million lb. for rigid . The markets that have started to open up for the foam in the past year or so seem to justify the expectations . Furniture upholstery , as just one example , can easily take millions of pounds ; ; foamed refrigerator insulation is under intensive evaluation by every major manufacturer ; ; and use of the foam for garment interlining is only now getting off the ground , with volume potential in the offing . Basic chemistry Urethane foams are , basically , reaction products of hydroxyl-rich materials and polyisocyanates ( usually tolylene diisocyanate ) . Blowing can be either one of two types -- carbon dioxide gas generated by the reaction of water on the polyisocyanate or mechanical blowing through the use of a low-boiling liquid such as a fluorinated hydrocarbon . The most important factor in determining what properties the end-product will have is quite naturally the type of hydroxyl-rich compound that is used in its production . Originally , the main types used were various compositions of polyesters . These are still in wide use today , particularly in semi-rigid formulations , for such applications as cores for sandwich-type structural panels , foamed-in-place insulation , automotive safety padding , arm rests , etc. . More recently , polyethers -- again in varied compositions , molecular weights , and branching -- have come into use at first for the flexible foams , just lately for the rigids . The polyether glycols are claimed to give flexible urethanes a spring-back action which is much desired in cushioning . Although the first polyether foams on the market had to be produced by the two-step prepolymer method , today , thanks to new catalysts , they can be produced by a one-shot technique . It is possible that the polyether foams may soon be molded on a production basis in low-cost molds with more intricate contours and with superior properties to latex foam . The polyester urethane foam is generally produced with adipic acid polyesters ; ; the polyether group generally consists of foams produced with polypropylene glycol or polypropylene glycol modified with a triol . One shot vs. prepolymer In the prepolymer system , the isocyanate and resin are mixed anhydrously and no foaming occurs . The foaming can be accomplished at some future time at a different location by the addition of the correct proportion of catalyst in solution . In one-shot , the isocyanate , polyester or polyether resin , catalyst , and other additives are mixed directly and a foam is produced immediately . Basically , this means that simpler processing equipment ( the mixture has good flowing characteristics ) and less external heat ( the foaming reaction is exothermic and develops internal heat ) are required in one-shot foaming , although , at the same time , the problems of controlling the conditions of one-shot foaming are critical ones . Properties Most commercial uses of urethane foams require densities between 2 and 30 lb. / cu. ft. for rigid foams , between 1 and 3 lb. / cu. ft. for flexible foams . This latter figure compares with latex foam rubber at an average of 5.5 lb. / cu. ft. in commercial grades . Compression strength : Graph in Fig. 1 , p. 392 , indicates how the ratio of compressive strength to density varies as the latter is increased or decreased . The single curve line represents a specific formulation in a test example . By varying the formula , this curve may be moved forward or backward along the coordinates to produce any desired compression strength / density ratio . Thermal conductivity and temperature resistance : In flexible urethane foams , we are referring to the range between the highest and lowest temperatures under which the materials' primary performance remains functionally useful . In temperature resistance , this quality is usually related to specific properties , e.g. , flexural , tensile strengths , etc. . Thermal conductivity is directly traceable to the material's porous , air-cell construction which effectively traps air or a gas in the maze of minute bubbles which form its composition . These air or gas bubbles make highly functional thermal barriers . The K factor , a term used to denote the rate of heat transmission through a material ( B.t.u./sq. ft. of material/hr./*0F./in. of thickness ) ranges from 0.24 to 0.28 for flexible urethane foams and from 0.12 to 0.16 for rigid urethane foams , depending upon the formulation , density , cell size , and nature of blowing agents used . Table 1 , , p. 394 , shows a comparison of K factor ratings of a number of commercial insulating materials in common use , including two different types of rigid urethane foam . Flexural strength : This term refers to the ability of a material to resist bending stress and is determined by measuring the load required to cause failure by bending . The higher-density urethane semi-rigid foams usually have stronger flex fatigue resistance , i.e. , the 12 lb. / cu. ft. foam has 8 times the flexural strength of the 3 lb. / cu. ft. density . Note that flexural strength is not always improved by simply increasing the density , nor is the change always proportional from one formulation to another . Where flexural strength is an important factor , be sure that your urethane foam processor is aware of it . Tensile strength : This property refers to the greatest longitudinal stress or tension a material can endure without tearing apart . ( like compression strength of urethane foams , it has a direct relationship to formulation . ) Exceptional tensile strength is another of urethane foam's strong features . Figure 2 , above , shows the aging properties of urethane foams as determined by the percent of change in tensile strength during exposure to ultra-violet light . Processing urethanes There are many ways of producing a foamed urethane product . The foam can be made into slab stock and cut to shape , it can be molded , it can be poured-in-place , it can be applied by spray guns , etc. . Slab stock is still one of the most important forms of urethane end-product in use today . Basically , the foam machines that produce such stock consist of two or more pumping units , a variable mixer , a nozzle carriage assembly , and , in many cases , a conveyor belt to transport and contain the liquid during the reaction process and until it solidifies into foam . The ingredients are fed from tanks through a hose and into the mixer at a predetermined rate . The mixing head moves back and forth slowly across the width of the receptacle . It only takes a few minutes for the foaming action to be completed and after a short cure , the material can be cut into lengths as desired . Much has been done in the way of ingenious slitters to fabricate the slab stock into finished products . Profile cutting machines are available which can split foam to any desired thickness and produce sine , triangle , trapezoid , and other profiles in variable heights , dimensions , etc. . The convoluted sheets can be combined to attain certain cushioning effects mechanically rather than chemically . Also available is a slitter which `` peels '' the inside of a folded block of foam and can be used to slit continuous sheets up to 300 yd. in length , down to 1/16 in. thick . The low cost and ease of fabrication of the dies for three-dimensional foam cutting plus the wide variety of shapes , dimensions , and contours that can be tailor-made to customer requirements has made the technique useful for producing case liners , materials handling containers , packaging and cushioning devices , and such novelties as soap dishes , toys , head rests , arch supports , and gas pedal covers . Molding Although slab stock appeared first , it soon became apparent that for the production of cushions with irregular shapes , crowned contours , or rounded edges , the cutting of slab stock is a wasteful and uneconomical process . Only by resorting to molding techniques can the cushion manufacturer hope to compete satisfactorily in the established cushion market . The closed molding of flexible urethane foams has been a problem ever since the introduction of the material ( molding in open molds was more feasible ) . Satisfactory methods for polyester foams and even prepolymer polyether foams were never fully achieved . Closed molding generally resulted in parts weighing more ( because of higher density ) than parts fabricated from free-blown foams . This counteracted the gain from having no scrap loss . In addition , there were difficulties with the flow and spreading of the foam mixture over the mold surface , trouble with lack of gel strength in the rising foam , and problems of splits . The introduction of one-shot polyether foam systems , aided by the development of new catalysts , helped to alleviate some of the problems of closed molding . While there are still many bugs to be ironed out , the technique is fast developing . Other techniques Simple systems are available that make it possible for urethane foam components to be poured , pumped , etc. , into a void where they foam up to fill the void . In a typical application -- the making of rigid urethane foam sandwich panels -- an amount of foam mixture calculated to expand 10 to 20% more than the volume of the panel is poured into the panel void and the top of the panel is locked in place by a jig . Temperature of the wash and rinse waters is maintained at 85 - 90-degrees-F ( 29 - 32-degrees-C ) . The top rolls are loaded with 40 lbs. . Sixty lbs. loading is possible but 40 lbs. is adequate . The suds box drain is arranged at the start to deliver into the raised main drain pipe ( thus returning suds to soap box ) and the machine is started . The 160-ml. bath containing the calculated amount of detergent is applied slowly and directly to the running specimen . Washing is continued for 30 minutes or for a period of time sufficient to allow 100 nips or passes through the squeeze rolls . At the conclusion of the washing , 8 liters of water at 90-degrees-F ( 32*0C. ) are automatically metered from the rinse reservoir to the washing tubs , 4 liters to each tub . This operation requires from 10 to 12 minutes . During the rinsing operation the volume in the tubs gradually increases until overflow from the main drain begins . At this point the drains are readjusted so that the suds box drain will discharge directly into the waste line and the main tub drain is set at the 2-1/2 mark on the drain gauge . When all of the rinse water has passed from the reservoir to the tubs the main drains are lowered to permit complete draining of the tubs . The run is complete when all the water has drained off into the waste line . By this procedure rinsing progresses in two stages , first by dilution until the time when the drains are separated and thereafter by displacement of the soil-bearing liquor by clean rinse water , since soiled liquor squeezed from the specimens at the nip passes directly to waste from the suds box drains . This method of rinsing appears to produce maximum cleansing with minimum soil redeposition . Suggested evaluation and classification Evaluation may be made on either a soil-removal or a grease-removal basis as desired . A reflectance-measuring instrument may be desirable to measure cleaning , whereas Soxhlet extraction is necessary to measure grease removal . Purpose and scope This test method is intended for determining the dimensional changes of woven or knitted fabrics , made of fibers other than wool , to be expected when the cloth is subjected to laundering procedures commonly used in the commercial laundry and the home . Four washing test procedures are established , varying in severity from very severe to very mild , and are intended to cover the range of practical washing from commercial procedure to hand washing . Five drying test procedures are established to cover the range of drying techniques used in the home and commercial laundry . Three methods for determining the dimensional restorability characteristics are established for those textiles which require restoration by ironing or wearing after laundering . These tests are not accelerated and must be repeated to evaluate dimensional changes after repeated launderings . Table 1 , summarizes all of the various washing , drying , and restoration procedures available . The person using these tests must determine which combination of procedures is practical for any specific item in order to evaluate the dimensional changes of textile fabrics or garments after laundering procedures commonly used in the home or commercial laundry . It is possible to identify the test procedure completely with a code consisting of a Roman Numeral , a letter , and an Arabic number . For example Test 3 , E 1 refers to a specimen which has been washed by procedure `` 3 ( '' ( at 160-degrees-F ) for a total of 60 minutes in the machine , has been dried in a tumble dryer by procedure `` E '' and has been subjected to restorative forces on the Tension Presser by procedure `` 1 '' . Principle A specimen or garment is washed in a cylindrical reversing wash wheel , dried and subjected to restorative forces where necessary . Temperature and time of agitation in the wash wheel are varied to obtain different degrees of severity . Drying procedures and application of restorative force procedures are varied to conform with end-use handling during home or commercial laundering . Distances marked on the specimen in warp and filling directions ( or wales and courses for knitted fabrics ) are measured before and after laundering . Apparatus and materials wash wheel -- cylindrical wash wheel of the reversing type . The wheel ( cage ) is 20 to 24 inches inside diameter and 20 to 24 inches inside length . There are three fins each approximately three inches wide extending the full length of the inside of the wheel . One fin is located every 120-degrees around the inside diameter of the wheel . The wash wheel rotates at a speed of 30 revolutions per minute , making five to ten revolutions before reversing . The water inlets are large enough to permit filling the wheel to an eight-inch level in less than two minutes , and the outlet is large enough to permit discharge of this same amount of water in less than two minutes . The machine is equipped with a pipe for injecting live steam that is capable of raising the temperature of water at an eight-inch level from 110-degrees to 140-degrees-F ( 38*0 to 60*0C. ) in less than two minutes . The machine shall contain an opening for the insertion of a thermometer or other equivalent equipment for determining the temperature of the water during the washing and rinsing procedures . It is equipped with an outside water gauge that will indicate the level of the water in the wheel . A domestic automatic washer that will give equivalent results may be used . The wash wheel is the equipment preferred for the test . Pressing equipment -- flat-bed press measuring 24 inches by 50 inches or larger . Any flat-bed press capable of pressing a specimen 22 inches square may be used as an alternative . The flat-bed press is maintained at a temperature not less than 275-degrees-F ( 135*0C. ) . Dryer -- dryer of the rotary tumble type , having a cylindrical basket approximately 30 inches in diameter and 24 inches in length and rotating at approximately 35 r.p.m. . The dryer is provided with a means of maintaining a drying temperature of 120-degrees - 160-degrees-F ( 49*0 - 71*&0C. ) , measured in the exhaust vent as close as possible to the drying chamber . Screen drying racks -- 16-mesh screening ( Saran or Velon ) . Drying room -- facilities for drip- or line-drying . Extractor -- centrifugal extractor of the laundry-type with a perforated basket , approximately 11 inches deep by 17 inches in diameter , with an operating speed of approximately 1,500 r.p.m. . Pen and ink , indelible -- or other suitable marking device . measuring scale -- Soap , neutral chip -- fed. Spec. 566 or Aj . Softener -- e.g. sodium metaphosphate or sodium hexametaphosphate ( if needed in hard water areas ) . Detergent , synthetic -- alkylarysulfonate type . Flatiron , electric -- approximately 3 lb. tension presser -- consisting of a padded ironing board from which extend clamping members on all four sides . Two of the clamps are fixed to the edges of the board whereas two clamps travel on guide rails opposite the fixed clamps . The movable clamps travel on carriages which ride the rails and are drawn by dead-weight loading . Sets of weights are provided so that the load can be selected in the range of 1/2 to 4 pounds . A perforated aluminum plate , used to provide the drying surface , is heated by means of a flatiron . A special template is furnished with the apparatus to enable marking a specimen for a central measuring area and the fabric extensions to the clamps ( see Fig. 2 ) . Knit shrinkage gauge -- consisting of a set of 20 mounting pins set in guides in radial slots ( Fig. 1 ) . Each pin is individually sprung to a tensioning member which is driven outwardly in the slot . The springs have an extension of 1 inch at Af tension . The tensioning members have a common drive so that the application of restorative force takes place simultaneously in all directions in the plane of the test specimen . The minimum diameter of the pin frame in the collapsed state is 11 inches and the maximum diameter in the freely extended state ( unloaded ) is 14 inches . The surface of the apparatus in contact with the test specimen is uncluttered and polished so as to be as friction-free as possible . Test specimens The preparation of test specimens will vary depending upon the type of dimensional restorability procedure ( if any ) to be used . Three specimens for each sample to be tested are required in order to arrive at a satisfactory average of performance . This is especially true for knitted fabrics . Specimens are allowed to reach moisture equilibrium with a standard atmosphere of Af and Af and then laid out without tension on a flat , polished surface , care being taken that the fabric is free from wrinkles or creases . Fabrics that are badly distorted in their unlaundered state due to faulty finishing may give deceptive dimensional change results when laundered by any procedure . This also holds true if restorative forces are applied . Therefore , it is recommended that in such cases the sample be replaced , or if used , the results of dimensional change or dimensional restorability tests be considered as indicative only . Generally , it is necessary to mark distances on a specimen ( or garment ) in both lengthwise and widthwise directions and to measure before and after laundering . The distances may be marked with indelible ink and a fine-point pen , by sewing fine threads into the fabric , or by a specially designed stamping machine . The marked distances are parallel to the respective yarns . Usually , the greater the original distances marked , the greater will be the accuracy of the test . Distances of less than 10 inches are not recommended . Woven fabrics to be dried by procedure b ( flat-bed pressed ) or restored by procedure 3 ( hand ironing ) : The specimen of fabric is a rectangle at least 22 by 22 inches , except for cloth narrower than 22 inches , in which case the specimen is the entire width of the fabric . Three distances , each at least 18 inches , are measured and marked off parallel to each of the warp and filling directions . The distances are at least two inches from any edge of the specimen . Woven or warp knitted fabrics to be subjected to restorative procedure 1 ( tension presser ) . Each specimen is at least 25 inches by 25 inches . Place the template ( Fig. 2 ) on the fabric so that the sides of the 10 inch square cut out of the template are parallel to the warp and filling for woven fabrics , or the wales and courses for knitted fabrics , and so that the same amount of fabric extends beyond the edges of the template on all sides . Mark the specimen at the outer edges of the template with pen and indelible ink ; ; also place three dots on the specimen at each side of the 10 inch square , one dot at midpoint , and one at approximately 1/2 inch from each corner . Measure and record . Circular knitted fabrics to be subjected to restorative procedure 2 , ( knit shrinkage gauge ) . Each specimen is approximately 16 inches square . The markings consist of a centrally located 10 inch diameter measuring circle and a 14 inch diameter circle of 20 dots equidistantly spaced ( See Figure 1 ) . Garments . Critical measurements in length and width directions should be taken before and after washing , drying , and restorative procedures . Procedure washing -- The washing procedures are summarized in Table 2 . Place the specimen in the wash wheel with sufficient other similar fabric to make a dry load of Af pounds . Start the wash wheel and note the time . Immediately add water at 100 - 105-degrees-F ( 38 - 43*0C. ) to the wheel to a level of Af inches ; ; this level will be increased by condensed steam . When this water level has been reached , inject steam into the wheel until the temperature reaches that shown in Column B of Table 2 . Add sufficient soap ( and softener if required to counteract hard water ) to furnish a good running suds , or if desired use a synthetic detergent . Test 1 , -- Stop the wash wheel at the end of the time shown in Column A of Table 2 , and drain . Refill the machine to a level of Af inches with water at 100 - 109-degrees-F ( ( 38 - 43*0 C. ) and start the machine . Inject steam , if necessary , to reach the temperature shown in Column D of Table 2 . Again stop the machine at the end of the time shown in Column C of Table 2 . This procedure is repeated for the second rinse , using the temperatures and time shown in Columns F and E of Table 2 . Tests 2 , 3 , , , and 4 . -- Run the machine continuously until completion of the test . Drain off the soap solution of the suds cycle at such a time that the wheel has become substantially empty of soap and water at the end of the time shown in Column A of Table 2 , , measured from the time the wash wheel was started . Refill the machine to a level of Af inches with water at 100 - 109-degrees-F ( 38 - 43*0C. ) . When this water level has been reached , inject steam until the temperature is that shown in Column Aj . Drain off the water at such a time that the wheel has become substantially empty of water at the end of the sum of the times shown in Columns A and C , measured from the time the wash wheel was started . Immediately refill to a level of Af inches with water at 100 - 109-degrees-F ( 38 - 43*0C ) . When this water level has been reached inject steam until the temperature is that shown in Column Aj . Drain off the water at such a time that the wheel has become substantially empty of water at the end of the sum of the times shown in Columns A , C , and E , measured from the time the wash wheel was started . High-gain , photoelectronic image intensification is applied under conditions of low incident light levels whenever the integration time required by a sensor or recording instrument exceeds the limits of practicability . Examples of such situations are ( aerial ) night reconnaissance , the recording of radioactive tracers in live body tissues , special radiography in medical or industrial applications , track recording of high energy particles , etc. . High-gain photoelectronic image intensification may be achieved by several methods ; ; some of these are listed below : ( A ) Cascading single stages by coupling lens systems , ( B ) Channel-type , secondary emission image intensifier , ( C ) Image intensifier based upon the `` multipactor '' principle , ( D ) Transmission secondary electron multiplication image intensifiers ( TSEM tubes ) , ( E ) Cascading of single stages , enclosed in one common envelope . Cascading single stages by coupling lens systems is rather inefficient as the lens systems limit the obtainable gain quite severely . Channel-type image intensifiers are capable of achieving high-gain values ; ; they suffer , however , from an inherently low resolution . Image intensifiers based upon the multipactor principle appear to hold promise as far as obtainable resolution is concerned . However , the unavoidable low-duty cycle restricts the effective gain . TSEM tubes have been constructed showing high gain and resolution . However , electrostatic focus , important for many applications , has not been realized for these devices . Resolution limitations with electrostatic focus might be anticipated due to chromatic aberrations . Furthermore , the thin film dynodes appear to have a natural diameter limitation wherever a mesh support cannot be tolerated . Cascaded single stages enclosed by a common envelope have been constructed with high gain and high resolution . These tubes may differ both in the choice of the electron optical system and in the design of the coupling members . The electron optical system may be either a magnetic or electrostatic one . The magnification may be smaller , equal , or larger than unity . An electrostatic system suffers generally from image plane curvature leading to defocusing in the peripheral image region if a flat viewing screen ( or interstage coupler ) is utilized , while a magnetic system requires accurate adjustment of the solenoid , which is heavy and bulky . As it will be discussed later , peripheral defocusing can be improved on by utilizing curved fiber couplers . It should be noted , however , that the paraxial resolution is quite similar for both electron optical systems . It is felt that fiber-coupled double- ( and multi- ) stage image intensifiers will gain considerable importance in the future . Therefore , we shall consider in this paper the theoretical gain and resolution capabilities of such tubes . The luminous efficiency and resolution of single stages , fiber couplers , and finally of the composite tube will be computed . It will be shown theoretically that the high image intensification obtainable with such a tube and contact photography permits the utilization of extremely low incident light levels . The effect of device and quantum noise , associated with such low input levels , will be described . After these theoretical considerations , constructional details of a fiber-coupled , double-stage X-ray image intensifier will be discussed . Measured performance characteristics for this experimental tube will be listed . The conclusion shall be reached that fiber-coupled , double-stage tubes represent a sensible and practical approach to high-gain image intensification . Basic design of a fiber-coupled , double-stage image intensifier The tube design which forms the basis of the theoretical discussion shall be described now . The electron optical system ( see fig. 14-1 ) is based in principle on the focusing action of concentric spherical cathode and anode surfaces . The inner ( anode ) sphere is pierced , elongated into a cup , and terminated by the phosphor screen . The photoelectrons emitted from a circular segment of the cathode sphere are focused by the positive lens action of the two concentric spheres , pass through the ( negative ) lens formed by the anode aperture , and impinge upon the cathodoluminescent viewing screen . The cylindrical focusing electrode permits adjustment of the positive lens part by varying the focusing potential . The anode potential codetermines the gain , G , and magnification , M , of the stage . Both the photocathode and the image plane of such an electrode configuration are curved concave as seen from the anode aperture . The field-flattening property of the biconcave fiber coupler can be utilized to alleviate the peripheral resolution losses resulting with a flat phosphor-screen or coupling member . For the same reason , the output fiber plate is planoconcave , its exposed flat side permitting contact photography if a permanent record is desired . As it will be shown later , the field-flattening properties of the interstage and output fiber coupler comprise indeed the main advantage of such a design . The second photocathode and both phosphor surfaces are deposited on the fiber plate substrates . The photocathode sensitivities S , phosphor efficiencies P , and anode potentials V of the individual stages shall be distinguished by means of subscripts 1 , and 2 , in the text , where required . Both stages are assumed to have unity magnification . Theoretical discussion of flux gain flux gain of a single stage The luminous gain of a single stage with Af ( flux gain ) is , to a first approximation , given by the product of the photocathode sensitivity S ( amp / lumen ) , the anode potential V ( volts ) , and the phosphor conversion efficiency P ( lumen/watt ) . In general , P is a function of V and the current density , but it shall here be assumed as a constant . The luminous efficiency Af of a photocathode depends on the maximum radiant sensitivity Af and on the spectral distribution of the incident light Af by the relation : Af where Af is normalized radiant photocathode sensitivity . Af is standard visibility function . The luminous flux gain of a single stage is given by : Af . If the input light distribution falls beyond the visible range , Af as expected , since Af . Such cases are not considered here . Efficiency of fiber couplers The efficiency of fiber optics plates depends on four factors : ( A ) numerical aperture ( N.A. ) ; ; ( B ) end ( Fresnel reflection ) losses ( R ) ; ; ( C ) internal losses ( I.L. ) ; ; ( D ) packing efficiency ( F.R. ) . The numerical aperture of the fibers is given by : Af where Af . The angle Af is measured in the medium of index Af . Settled phosphors , as generally used in image intensifiers , have low optical contact with the substrate surface , hence Af shall be assumed . The numerical aperture should be in general close to unity . This condition can be satisfied , e.g. , with Af and Af or equivalent glass combinations . A sufficiently good approximation for determining the end reflection losses R can be obtained from the angle independent Fresnel formula : Af . For phosphor to fiber and fiber to air surfaces , and assuming Af , we obtain Af percent . This value may be reduced to 4.6 percent by means of a ( very thin ) glass layer of index 1.5 . Hence , the Af factor for the output fiber coupler is Af . As the index of refraction of photosensitive surfaces of the SbCs-type lies around 2 , the Fresnel losses at the fiber-photocathode interface are about 0.5 percent and the Af factor for the interstage coupler is 0.95 . It might be anticipated that multiple coatings will reduce end reflection losses even further . The internal losses are due to absorption and the small but finite losses suffered in the numerous internal reflections due to deviations from the prescribed , cylindrical fiber cross-section and minute imperfections of the core-jacket interface . These losses depend on fiber diameter and length , absorption coefficient , the mean value of the loss per internal reflection and last , but not least , on the angular distribution of the incident light . Explicit expressions ( integral averages ) are given in the literature . Lacking reliable data for some of the variables , we are relying on experimental data of about 20 percent internal losses for 1/4-inch long , small ( 5 - 10 M ) diameter fibers . This relatively high value is probably due to the small fiber diameters increasing the number of internal reflections . Since we are considering here relatively small diameter ( 1 - 1.5 inches ) fiber plates , their average thickness can be kept below 1/4 inch and their internal losses may be assumed as 15 percent ( per plate ) . The packing efficiency , F.R. , of fiber plates did not receive much attention in the literature , probably as it is high for the larger fibers generally used , until rather recently . For circular fibers in a closely packed hexagonal array , the packing efficiency is given by : Af where Af , and 0.906 is the ratio of the area of a circle to that of the circumscribed hexagon . For the small diameter fibers now technically feasible and required for about 100 Af resolution , Af . The cladding thickness is about 0.5 M , hence , Af and Af . Thus , the efficiency **yt couplers is given by -- Af or approximately 50 percent each . It must be remembered that the fiber plates replace a glass window and a ( mica ) membrane , in addition to an optical output lens system . The efficiency Af of an Af lens at the magnification Af is : Af . Neglecting absorption , the end losses of the coupling membrane and the output window Af would be 6 percent and 8 percent . Thus , the combined efficiency of the elements replaced by the two fiber plates ( with a combined efficiency of 0.25 ) is 0.043 or about six times less than that of the two fiber plates . Gain of fiber coupled image intensifiers Including the brightness gain Af due to the Af area demagnification , the overall gain of a fiber coupled double stage image intensifier is : Af . It is obvious that the careful choice of photocathode which maximizes Af for a given input E ( in the case of the second stage , for the first phosphor screen emission ) is very important . The same consideration should govern the choice of the second-stage phosphor screen for matching with the spectral sensitivity of the ultimate sensor ( e.g. , photographic emulsion ) . We have evaluated the `` matching integrals '' for two types of photocathodes ( S-11 and S-20 ) and three types of light input . The input light distributions considered are P-11 and P-20 phosphor emission and the so-called `` night light '' ( N.L. ) as given by H.W. Babcock and J. J. Johnson . The integrals ( in units ) are listed in table 14-1 , below . Theoretical discussion of paraxial device resolution resolution limitations in a single stage The resolution limitations for a single stage are given by the inherent resolution of the electron optical system as well as the resolution capabilities of the cathodoluminescent viewing screen . The resolution capabilities of an electrostatic system depend on both the choice of magnification and chromatic aberrations . It has been stated previously that a minifying electrostatic system yields a lower resolution than a magnifying system or a system with unity magnification . Furthermore , the chromatic aberrations depend on the chosen high voltage . In general , a high anode voltage reduces chromatic aberrations and thus increases the obtainable resolution . The luminous gain of the discussed tube was calculated from Eq. ( 6 ) for the 16 possible combinations of S-11 and S-20 photocathodes and P-11 and P-20 phosphor screens , for night light and P-20 light input . ( The P-20 input is of interest because it corresponds roughly to the light emission of conventional X-ray fluorescent screens ) . The following efficiencies obtained from JEDEC and RCA specifications were used : Af . The following table ( 14-2 ) lists the ( luminous ) gain values computed according to Eq. ( 6 ) with Af . The possibility of a space charge blowup of the screen crossover of the elementary electron bundles has been pointed out . It is obvious that such an influence can only be expected in the final stage of an image intensifier at rather high output levels . Space charge influences will also decrease at increased voltages . Electrostatic systems of the pseudo-symmetric type have been tested for resolution capabilities by applying electronography . A resolution of 70 - 80 line-pairs per millimeter appears to be feasible . The inherent resolution of a cathodoluminescent phosphor screen decreases with increasingly aggregate thickness ( with increasing anode voltage ) , decreases with decreasing porosity ( thus the advantage of cathodophoretic phosphor deposition ) and might be impaired by the normally used aluminum mirror . Thus , in general , elementary light optical effects , light scatter , and electron scatter determine the obtainable resolution limit . It should be noted that photoluminescence , due to `` Bremsstrahlung '' generated within the viewing screen by electron impact , appears to be important only if anode voltages in excess of 30 KV are utilized . It has been stated that settled cathodoluminescent phosphor screens may have a limiting resolution of 60 Af at high voltage values of approximately 20 Aj . For the further discussion , we shall thus assume an electron optical resolution of 80 Af and phosphor screen resolution of 60 Af . The set of all decisions is called the operating policy or , more simply , the policy . An optimal policy is one which in some sense gets the best out of the process as a whole by maximizing the value of the product . There are thus three components to an optimal design problem : ( 1 ) The specification of the state of the process stream ; ; ( 2 ) The specification of the operating variables and the transformation they effect ; ; ( 3 ) The specification of the objective function of which the optimization is desired . For a chemical process the first of these might involve the concentrations of the different chemical species , and the temperature or pressure of the stream . For the second we might have to choose the volume of reactor or amount of cooling to be supplied ; ; the way in which the transformation of state depends on the operating variables for the main types of reactors is discussed in the next chapter . The objective function is some measure of the increase in value of the stream by processing ; ; it is the subject of Chapter 4 . The essential characteristic of an optimal policy when the state of the stream is transformed in a sequence of stages with no feedback was first isolated by Bellman . He recognized that whatever transformation may be effected in the first stage of an R-stage process , the remaining stages must use an optimal Af-stage policy with respect to the state resulting from the first stage , if there is to be any chance of optimizing the complete process . Moreover , by systematically varying the operating conditions in the first stage and always using the optimal Af-stage policy for the remaining stages , we shall eventually find the optimal policy for all R stages . Proceeding in this way , from one to two and from two to three stages , we may gradually build up the policy for any number . At each step of the calculation the operating variables of only one stage need be varied . To see how important this economy is , let us suppose that there are M operating variables at each stage and that the state is specified by N variables ; ; then the search for the maximum at any one stage will require a number of operations of order Af ( where a is some number not unreasonably large ) . To proceed from one stage to the next a sufficient number of feed states must be investigated to allow for interpolation ; ; this number will be of the order of Af . If , however , we are seeking the optimal R-stage policy for a given feed state , only one search for a maximum is required at the final step . Thus a number of operations of the order of Af are required . If all the operating variables were varied simultaneously , Af operations would be required to do the same job , and as R increases this increases very much more rapidly than the number of operations required by the dynamic program . But even more important than this is the fact that the direct search by simultaneously varying all operating conditions has produced only one optimal policy , namely , that for the given feed state and R stages . In contrast , the dynamic program produces this policy and a whole family of policies for any smaller number of stages . If the problem is enlarged to require a complete coverage of feed states , Af operations are needed by the dynamic program and Af by the direct search . But Af is vastly larger than R . No optimism is more baseless than that which believes that the high speed of modern digital computers allows for use of the crudest of methods in searching out a result . Suppose that Af , and that the average operation requires only Af sec. . Then the dynamic program would require about a minute whereas the direct search would take more than three millennia ! ! The principle of optimality thus brings a vital organization into the search for the optimal policy of a multistage decision process . Bellman ( 1957 ) has annunciated in the following terms : `` An optimal policy has the property that whatever the initial state and initial decision are , the remaining decisions must constitute an optimal policy with respect to the state resulting from the first decision '' . This is the principle which we will invoke in every case to set up a functional equation . It appears in a form that is admirably suited to the powers of the digital computer . At the same time , every device that can be employed to reduce the number of variables is of the greatest value , and it is one of the attractive features of dynamic programming that room is left for ingenuity in using the special features of the problem to this end . 2.2 the discrete deterministic process Consider the process illustrated in Fig. 2.1 , consisting of R distinct stages . These will be numbered in the direction opposite to the flow of the process stream , so that stage R is the T stage from the end . Let the state of the stream leaving stage R be denoted by a vector Af and the operating variables of stage R by Af . Thus Af denotes the state of the feed to the R-stage process , and Af the state of the product from the last stage . Each stage transforms the state Af of its feed to the state Af in a way that depends on the operating variables Af . We write this Af . This transformation is uniquely determined by Af and we therefore speak of the process as deterministic . In practical situations there will be restrictions on the admissible operating conditions , and we regard the vectors as belonging to a fixed and bounded set S . The set of vectors Af constitutes the operating policy or , more briefly , the policy , and a policy is admissible if all the Af belong to S . When the policy has been chosen , the state of the product can be obtained from the state of the feed by repeated application of the transformation ( 1 ) ; ; thus Af . The objective function , which is to be maximized , is some function , usually piecewise continuous , of the product state . Let this be denoted by Af . An optimal policy is an admissible policy Af which maximizes the objective function P . The policy may not be unique but the maximum value of P certainly is , and once the policy is specified this maximum can be calculated by ( 2 ) and ( 3 ) as a function of the feed state Af . Let Af where the maximization is over all admissible policies Af . When it is necessary to be specific we say that the optimal policy is an optimal R-stage policy with respect to the feed state Af . For any choice of admissible policy Af in the first stage , the state of the stream leaving this stage is given by Af . This is the feed state of the subsequent Af stages which , according to the principle of optimality , must use an optimal Af-stage policy with respect to this state . This will result in a value Af of the objective function , and when Af is chosen correctly this will give Af , the maximum of the objective function . Thus Af where the maximization is over all admissible policies Af , and Af is related to Af by ( 5 ) . The sequence of equations ( 6 ) can be solved for Af when Af is known , and clearly Af , the maximization being over all admissible Af . The set of equations ( 5 ) , ( 6 ) , and the starting equation ( 7 ) is of a recursive type well suited to programming on the digital computer . In finding the optimal R-stage policy from that of Af stages , only the function Af is needed . When Af has been found it may be transferred into the storage location of Af and the whole calculation repeated . We also see how the results may be presented , although if n , the number of state variables , is large any tabulation will become cumbersome . A table or set of tables may be set out as in Table 2.1 . To extract the optimal R-stage policy with respect to the feed state Af , we enter section R of this table at the state Af and find immediately from the last column the maximum value of the objective function . In the third column is given the optimal policy for stage R , and in the fourth , the resulting state of the stream when this policy is used . Since by the principle of optimality the remaining stages use an optimal Af-stage policy with respect to Af , we may enter section Af of the table at this state Af and read off the optimal policy for stage Af and the resulting state Af . Proceeding in this way up the table we extract the complete optimal policy and , if it is desired , we can check on Af by evaluating Af at the last stage . It may be that the objective function depends not only on Af but also on Af , as when the cost of the operating policy is considered . A moment's reflection shows that the above algorithm and presentation work equally well in this case . A form of objective function that we shall often have occasion to consider is Af . Here P represents the value of the stream in state P and Q the cost of operating the stage with conditions Q . Hence P is the increase in value of the stream minus the cost of operation , that is , the net profit . If Af denotes the net profit from stage R and Af , then the principle of optimality gives Af . This sequence of equations may be started with the remark that with no process Af there is no profit , i.e. , Af . 2.3 the discrete stochastic process The process in which the outcome of any one stage is known only statistically is also of interest , although for chemical reactor design it is not as important as the deterministic process . In this case the stage R operating with conditions Af transforms the state of the stream from Af to Af , but only the probability distribution of Af is known . This is specified by a distribution function Af such that the probability that Af lies in some region D of the stage space is Af . We cannot now speak of maximizing the value of the objective function , since this function is now known only in a probabilistic sense . We can , however , maximize its expected value . For a single stage we may define Af where the maximization is by choice of Af . We thus have an optimal policy which maximizes the expected value of the objective function for a given Af . If we consider a process in which the outcome of one stage is known before passage to the next , then the principle of optimality shows that the policy in subsequent stages should be optimal with respect to the outcome of the first . Then Af , the maximization being over all admissible Af and the integration over the whole of stage space . The type of presentation of results used in the deterministic process may be used here , except that now the fourth column is redundant . The third column gives the optimal policy , but we must wait to see the outcome of stage R and enter the preceding section of the table at this state . The discussion of the optimal policy when the outcome of one stage is not known before passing to the next is a very much more difficult matter . 2.4 the continuous deterministic process In many cases it is not possible to divide the process into a finite number of discrete stages , since the state of the stream is transformed in a continuous manner through the process . We replace r , the number of the stage from the end of the process , by t , a continuous variable which measures the `` distance '' of the point considered from the end of the process . The word distance is used here in a rather general sense ; ; it may in fact be the time that will elapse before the end of the process . If T is the total `` length '' of the process , its feed state may be denoted by a vector p(T) and the product state by p(Q) . P denotes the state at any point T and Q the vector of operating variables there . A gyro-stabilized platform system , using restrained gyros , is well suited for automatic leveling because of the characteristics of the gyro-platform-servo combination . The restrained gyro-stabilized platform with reasonable response characteristics operates with an approximate equation of motion , neglecting transient effects , as follows : Af where U is a torque applied about the output axis of the controlling gyro . The platform angle **yf is the angle about which the gyro is controlling . This is normally termed the gyro input axis , 90-degrees away from the gyro output or **yj axis . The gyro angular momentum is defined by H . Thus if the gyro and platform-controller combination maintains the platform with zero angular deviation about the **yf axis , the system can be rotated with an angular velocity Af if a torque is supplied to the gyro output axis Aj . It is assumed that the gyros are designed with electrical torquers so that a torque can be applied about their output axes . In the system shown in Fig. 7-1 , the accelerometer output is amplified and the resulting voltage is applied to the gyro output-axis torquer . This torque causes the entire system to rotate about the **yf axis , since the response to Af . If the polarities are correct , the platform rotates in such a direction as to reduce the accelerometer output to zero . As the accelerometer output is decreasing , the torque applied to the gyro output axis decreases and , therefore , the rate decreases . Finally , when the accelerometer output is zero , the entire system remains stationary , and the platform is , by definition , leveled . A mathematical block diagram for the leveling system is shown in Fig. 7-2 . The platform is initially off level by the angle Aj . The angle generated by the platform servo **yf multiplied by G is the effective acceleration acting on the accelerometer . Af is the scale factor of the accelerometer ( Af ) . The voltage Af is amplified by Af and applied to the gyro torquer with scale factor Af . Finally , the gyro-stabilized platform characteristic is represented by Af . The system as indicated in Fig. 7-2 is fundamental and simple because the transient effects of both the platform servo and the accelerometer have been neglected . With these factors included , an upper limit is placed on the allowable loop gain by stability considerations . In this type of system , a high loop gain is desirable because it provides a fast response time . When the frequency response characteristics of practical components are considered , their effect on stability does not present the most serious limit on the system loop gain . The time required for the system to reach a level position is approximately inversely proportional to the servo loop gain . In addition , the cutoff frequency for input accelerations is approximately proportional to the servo loop gain ; ; i.e. , high loop gain causes the system to respond to horizontal components of accelerations . This problem usually determines the lower limit of loop gain rather than response time . It must be noticed in Fig. 7-1 that the accelerometer responds to any input acceleration . The equation relating input acceleration to output platform angle is Af . In practice , the preflight leveling process takes place with the system mounted in the airframe . When the system is arranged for automatic leveling , the platform angles respond to any horizontal components of acceleration acting on the accelerometers . There are many such components of acceleration present due to the effect of wind gusts , engine noise , turbulence around the vehicle , etc. . One of the greatest problems associated with automatic leveling is establishing a true level in the presence of high-level acceleration noise . One solution to the problem is to operate with a low loop gain and to include low-pass filters . This technique causes the system to respond only to low frequency acceleration components such as the platform tilt . Since a lower loop gain and low-pass filtering increases the response time , a practical compromise must be reached . One of the most desirable solutions is achieved by the use of a non-linear amplifier for Af . The amplifier is designed so that its gain is large for accelerometer signals above a certain threshold level . Below this level , the amplifier gain Af is proportional and is of small value , in order to provide adequate noise filtering . The effect is that the platform returns from an off-level position at a rapid rate until it is nearly level , at which point the platform is controlled by a proportional servo with low enough frequency response so that the noise has little effect on the leveling process . When the system is on automatic leveling , the gyro drift is canceled by the output of the leveling system ( amplifier Af ) . The platform actually tilts off level so that the accelerometer output , when amplified by Af , will supply the correct current to the gyro torquer to cancel the gyro drift . The amount of platform dip required depends upon the scale factors of the system . 7-3 . Practical leveling considerations . The automatic leveling system described in this section is readily adaptable to a gyro-stabilized platform consisting of three integrating gyros . The system requires some switching of flight equipment circuits . However , the leveling operation can be maintained and controlled remotely with no mechanical or optical contact with the platform . This leveling system will hold the platform on-level , automatically , as long as the system is actuated . A useful by-product of this system is that the information necessary to set the gyro drift biases is available from the currents necessary to hold the system in level . The leveling process can be accomplished manually , and the results are as satisfactory as those obtained with automatic equipment . The process consists in turning the platform manually until the outputs of both accelerometers are zero . The turning is accomplished by applying voltage to the gyro torquers described above . In brief , the human replaces amplifier Af in Figs. 7-1 and 7-2 . Manual leveling requires an appropriate display of the accelerometer outputs . If high accuracy is required in preflight leveling , it is usually necessary to integrate or doubly integrate the accelerometer outputs ( this also minimizes the noise problem ) . With integration , the effect of a small acceleration ( or small platform tilt angle ) can be seen after a time . However , skill is required on the part of an operator to level a platform to any degree of accuracy . Also , it requires more time as compared to the automatic approach . Manual leveling is inconvenient if the platform must be maintained accurately level for any prolonged period of time . The operator must continually supply the correct amount of turning current to the gyro torquers so that the effect of gyro drift is canceled . This process is especially difficult since gyro drifting is typically random . 7-4 . Platform heading . Platform heading consists of orienting the sensitive axis of the accelerometers parallel to the desired coordinate system of the navigator . In simpler terms , it amounts to pointing the platform in the proper direction . For purely inertial navigators , two techniques are available to accomplish the platform heading : Use of external or surveying equipment to establish proper heading ; ; Use of the characteristics of the platform components for an indication of true heading . The choice of the heading technique is dependent upon the accuracy requirements , field conditions , and the time available to accomplish the heading . 7-5 . External determination of heading -- surveying technique . With the gyro-stabilized platform leveled , it can be headed in the proper direction by using surveying techniques . The platform accelerometers must be slightly modified for this procedure . Before the accelerometers are mounted on the platform , the direction of their sensitive axis must be accurately determined . A mirror is mounted on each accelerometer so that the plane of the mirror is perpendicular to the sensitive axis of the unit . Transit . A precision transit is set up so that it is aligned with respect to true north . This can be done to a high degree of accuracy by existing surveying techniques . With the transit set up , a mirror on one of the accelerometers is sighted and the platform is turned until it is aligned . The sighting procedure includes the use of a fixture for the transit to project a beam of light , which is darkened by crossed hairs , on the accelerometer mirror . When the platform is aligned , the reflected image of the crossed hairs can be seen exactly superimposed upon the original crossed hairs . The images can easily be aligned with a high degree of accuracy . The platform is turned as required by supplying currents to the appropriate gyro torquers . Although this technique is simple and satisfactory , one practical difficulty does exist : the direction of true north must be known for each launch point . However , this difficulty is not too serious if it is realized that a surveying team can establish a true north base line with a few days' work . In many installations , the inertial platform is raised off the ground a considerable height when it is mounted in the vehicle before flight . With this situation , it is difficult to sight in on the platform with surveying equipment . If the platform is not too high off the ground , a transit can be mounted on a stand to raise it up to the platform . Obviously , the heading accuracy is lessened by such techniques since errors are introduced because of motion of the stand . Autocollimator . The transit can be replaced by an autocollimator . This instrument provides an electrical signal proportional to the angular deviations of the platform and can be used to automatically hold the platform on true heading . The electrical signal from the autocollimator is amplified and supplied to the Z-gyro torquer . If the polarity is correct , the platform will turn until the heading error angle is zero . Information is also available from this autocollimator system to set the drift bias for the Z-axis gyro . If the Z gyro is drifting , a current generated by the autocollimator is delivered to the gyro torquer to cancel the drift . If the drift error is systematic , it can be canceled with a bias circuit which can be arranged and adjusted to supply the required compensating current . Electrical pickoffs . It is possible to locate an angular electrical pickoff , which will indicate the angular deviation between the true heading direction and the platform . Essentially , the stator or reference portion of the pickoff is established with respect to the true heading direction , and the platform is turned either manually or automatically until the angular electrical pickoff signal is reduced to zero . 7-6 . Gyrocompass heading . Gyrocompass alignment is an automatic heading system which depends upon the characteristic of one gyro to establish true heading . For the case of a purely inertial autonavigator consisting of three restrained gyros , a coordinate system is used where the sensitive axis of the X accelerometer is parallel to the east-west direction at the base point , and the Y accelerometer sensitive axis is parallel to the north-south direction at the base point . The accelerometers are mounted rigidly on the platform . Thus , if one accelerometer is properly aligned , the other is also . The input axis of the appropriate gyros are parallel to the sensitive direction of the accelerometers . Figure 7-3 shows a platform system with the gyro vectors arranged as described above . The platform is leveled and properly headed , so that the X-gyro input axis is parallel to the east-west direction and the Y-gyro input axis is parallel to the north-south direction . The input axis of the X gyro , when pointing in the east-west direction , is always perpendicular to the spin axis of earth . If the platform is not properly headed , the X-gyro input axis will see a component of the earth's rotation . The sensing of this rotation by the X gyro can be utilized to direct the platform into proper heading . In Fig. 7-4 , the input axis of the three-axis platform is shown at some point on the earth . The point is at a latitude **yl , and the platform is at an error in heading east . The earth is spinning at an angular velocity **zq equal to one revolution per 24 hr. . When the platform is level , **ye is a rotation about the Z axis of the platform Af . Since the earth is rotating and the unleveled gyro-stabilized platform is fixed with respect to a reference in space , an observer on the earth will see the platform rotating ( with respect to the earth ) . Thirty-three Scotty did not go back to school . His parents talked seriously and lengthily to their own doctor and to a specialist at the University Hospital -- Mr. McKinley was entitled to a discount for members of his family -- and it was decided it would be best for him to take the remainder of the term off , spend a lot of time in bed and , for the rest , do pretty much as he chose -- provided , of course , he chose to do nothing too exciting or too debilitating . His teacher and his school principal were conferred with and everyone agreed that , if he kept up with a certain amount of work at home , there was little danger of his losing a term . Scotty accepted the decision with indifference and did not enter the arguments . He was discharged from the hospital after a two-day checkup and he and his parents had what Mr. McKinley described as a `` celebration lunch '' at the cafeteria on the campus . Rachel wore a smart hat and , because she had been warned recently about smoking , puffed at her cigarettes through a long ivory holder stained with lipstick . Scotty's father sat sprawled in his chair , angular , alert as a cricket , looking about at the huge stainless-steel appointments of the room with an expression of proprietorship . Teachers -- men who wore brown suits and had gray hair and pleasant smiles -- came to their table to talk shop and to be introduced to Scotty and Rachel . Rachel was polite , Scotty indifferent . They ate the cafeteria food with its orange sauces and Scotty gazed without interest at his food , the teachers , the heroic baronial windows , and the bright ranks of college banners . His father tried to make the food a topic . `` The blueberry pie is good , Scotty . I recommend it '' . He looked at his son , his face worried . Scotty murmured , `` No , thanks '' , so softly his father had to bend his gaunt height across the table and turn a round brown ear to him . Scotty regarded the ear and the grizzled hair around it with a moment of interest . He said more loudly , `` I'm full , old Pop '' . He had eaten almost nothing on the crested , three-sectioned plate and had drunk about half the milk in its paper container . `` He's all right , Craig '' , Rachel said . `` I can fix him something later in the afternoon when we get home '' . Since his seizure , Scotty had had little appetite ; ; yet his changed appearance , surprisingly , was one of plumpness . His face was fuller ; ; his lips and the usually sharp lines of his jaw had become swollen-looking . He breathed now with his mouth open , showing a whitely curving section of lower teeth ; ; he kept his eyes , with their puffed blurred lids , always lowered , though not , apparently , focusing . Even his neck seemed thicker and , therefore , shorter . His hands , which had been as quick as a pair of fluttering birds , were now neither active nor really relaxed . They lay on his lap , palms up , stiffly motionless , the tapered fingers a little thick at the joints . Altogether he had , since the seizure , the appearance of a boy who overindulged in food and took no exercise . He looked lazy , spoiled , a little querulous . Rachel had little to say . She greeted her husband's colleagues with smiling politeness , offering nothing . Mr. McKinley , for all his sprawling and his easy familiarity , was completely alert to his son , eyes always on the still face , jumping to anticipate Scotty's desires . It was a strained , silent lunch . Rachel said , `` I'd better get him to bed '' . The doctors had suggested Scotty remain most of every afternoon in bed until he was stronger . Since Mr. McKinley had to give a lecture , Rachel and Scotty drove home alone in the Plymouth . They did not speak much . Scotty gazed out at ugly gray slums and said softly , `` Look at those stupid kids '' . It was a Negro section of peeling row houses , store-front churches and ragged children . Rachel had to bend toward Scotty and ask him to repeat . He said , `` Nothing '' . And then : `` There are lots of kids around here '' . Scotty looked at the children , his mouth slightly opened , his eyes dull . He felt tired and full and calm . Thirty-four the days seemed short , perhaps because his routine was , each day , almost the same . He rose late and went down in his bathrobe and slippers to have breakfast either alone or with Rachel . Virginia treated him with attention and tried to tempt his appetite with special food : biscuits , cookies , candies -- the result of devoted hours in the tiled kitchen . She would hover over him and , looking like her brother , anxiously watch the progress of Scotty's fork or spoon . `` You don't eat enough , honey . Try to get that down '' . Rachel , observing , would say , `` He has to rediscover his own capacity . It'll take time '' . Virginia and Rachel talked to each other quietly now , as allies who are political rather than natural might in a war atmosphere . Both watched Scotty constantly , Rachel without seeming to , Virginia openly , her eyes filled with concern . Scotty was neutral . He did not resent their supervision or Virginia's sometimes tiring sympathy . He ate what he felt like , slept as much or as little as he pleased , and moved about the draughty rooms of the house , when he was not in bed , with slow , dubious steps , like an elderly tourist in a cathedral . His energy was gone . He was able , now , to sit for hours in a chair in the living room and stare out at the bleak yard without moving . His hands lay loosely , yet stiffly -- they were like wax hands : almost lifelike , not quite -- folded in his lap ; ; his mouth hung slightly open . When he was asked a question or addressed in such a way that some response was inescapable , he would answer ; ; if , as often happened , he had to repeat because he had spoken too softly , he would repeat his words in the same way , without emphasis or impatience , only a little louder . He had not mentioned Kate . He had not even thought about her much except once or twice at night in bed when his slowly ranging thoughts would abruptly , almost accidentally , encounter her . At these times he felt a kind of pain in his upper chest , but it was an objective pain , in no way different from others in intensity and not different in kind ; ; it was like the bandaged wound on the back of his head which occasionally throbbed ; ; it was merely another part of his weakness . He was calm , drugged , and lazy . He did not care . Rachel mentioned Kate . She said , `` I notice the girl from across the street hasn't bothered to phone or visit '' . Scotty said , `` That's all right . Kate's all right '' . He thought about it briefly , then deliberately turned the talk to something else . Once , sitting at the front window in his parents' room , he saw Kate come out of her house . She was with Elizabeth . They were far off and looked tiny . The heavy branches in his front yard would hide and then reveal them . They turned at the bottom of Kate's steps and moved off in the direction of the park . He thought he saw -- it awakened and , for a moment , interested him -- that Elizabeth held a leash in her hand and that a round fuzzy puppy was on the end of the leash . Then they disappeared and Scotty got up and went into his own room and got into bed . By the time he was under the covers he had forgotten about seeing Kate . The doctor , since Scotty was no longer allowed to make his regular trips into town to see him , came often and informally to the house . He would sit , slim-waisted and spare , on the edge of Scotty's bed , his legs crossed so elaborately that the crossed foot could tap the floor . Scotty did not mind the doctor's unsmiling teasing as he used to . `` Husky young man '' , he said with mock distaste . `` I imagine you're always battling in school '' . `` I don't go to school any more '' . `` Pardon '' ? ? The doctor had to bend close to hear ; ; his delicate hand , as veined as a moth's wing , rested absently on Scotty's chest . Scotty said the same words more loudly . `` Oh . Well , we're taking a little vacation , that's all '' . He turned unsmilingly to Rachel . `` I think by the end of next week he could get out in the air a little . He could now but the weakness is very definite ; ; it would exhaust him further and unnecessarily . He'll be stronger soon '' . His stethoscope was on the table by Scotty's bed and he picked it up and wagged it at Scotty . He said fussily , `` Just keep the cap on those strong emotions '' . The stethoscope glinted silver in the darkening room . `` I'll drop by again in a few days '' . Rachel stayed on after the doctor had gone . She smoothed the covers on Scotty's bed and picked things up from the floor . She did not touch him . Scotty watched with disinterest . He did not speak . He had no desire to . She said , `` Do you think you'll miss school '' ? ? He had noticed how formal and irritably exact Rachel had grown . He did not care . He felt her irritability did not concern him , yet he knew he would not care even if it did . He shook his head . `` We've had any number of calls about you . You could win a popularity contest at that school without any trouble . Miss Estherson called twice . She wants to pay you a visit . She says the children miss you . Apparently you were the light of their lives '' . Scotty shrugged slightly . Rachel came close to the bed , bent as if she would kiss him , then moved away . She was frowning . `` That doctor annoys me '' . She seemed to speak to herself . `` Do you suppose his self-consciousness is characteristic of the new Negro professionals or merely of doctors in general '' ? ? She turned to him again . `` Well , Mrs. Charles -- Sally -- has phoned too . She was very worried '' . Rachel's tone was dry . `` She didn't really say '' -- She glanced away at the floor , then swooped gracefully and picked up one of Scotty's slippers . `` I mean , do you feel like seeing Kate '' ? ? Scotty said , `` I don't know '' . It was true . He did not . There was the slight pain , but it was no different from the throbbing in his head . `` Well , there's time , in any case . We'll wait till you're stronger and then talk about it '' . She put the slipper neatly by its mate at the foot of the bed . Scotty said , `` Okay '' . This time Rachel kissed him lightly on the forehead . Scotty was pleased . His father was a constant visitor . Scotty would hear the front door in the evening and then his father's deep slow voice ; ; it floated up the stairs . `` How's Scotty '' ? ? And Rachel's or Virginia's reply : `` better . He's getting plenty of rest '' . `` Is his appetite improved '' ? ? Or : `` Does he get exercise '' ? ? The exchange was almost invariable , and Scotty , in his bed , could hear every word of it . He never smiled . It required an energy he no longer possessed to be satirical about his father . His father would come upstairs and stand self-consciously at the foot of the bed and look at his son . After a pause , during which he studied Scotty's face as if Scotty were not there and could not study him too , Mr. McKinley would ask the same questions he had asked downstairs . Scotty would reply softly and his father , apologetically , would ask him to repeat . `` I'm eating more '' , he would say . Or : `` I walk around the house a lot '' . `` Perhaps you should get out a little '' . `` I'm not supposed to yet '' . He was not irritated . He did not mind the useless , kindly questions . He looked at the lined face with vague interest ; ; he felt he was noting it , as if it were something he might think about when he grew stronger . Mr. McKinley examined everything with critical care , seeking something material to blame for his son's illness . `` Have you got enough blankets '' ? ? And another time , without accusation : `` You never wore that scarf I bought you '' . Where their sharp edges seemed restless as sea waves thrusting themselves upward in angry motion , Papa-san sat glacier-like , his smooth solidity , his very immobility defying all the turmoil about him . `` Our objective '' , the colonel had said that day of the briefing , `` is Papa-san '' . There the objective sat , brooding over all . Gouge , burn , blast , insult it as they would , could anyone really take Papa-san ? ? Between the ponderous hulk and himself , in the valley over which Papa-san reigned , men had hidden high explosives , booby traps , and mines . The raped valley was a pregnant womb awaiting abortion . On the forward slope in front of his own post stretched two rows of barbed wire . At the slope's base coils of concertina stretched out of eye range like a wild tangle of children's hoops , stopped simultaneously , weirdly poised as if awaiting the magic of the child's touch to start them all rolling again . Closer still , regular barricades of barbed wire hung on timber supports . Was it all vain labor ? ? Who would clean up the mess when the war was over ? ? Smiling at his quixotic thoughts , Warren turned back from the opening and lit a cigarette before sitting down . Tonight a group of men , tomorrow night he himself , would go out there somewhere and wait . If he were to go with White , he would be out there two days , not just listening in the dark at some point between here and Papa-san , but moving ever deeper into enemy land -- behind Papa-san -- itself . Was this what he had expected ? ? He hadn't realized that there would be so much time to think , so many lulls . Somehow he had forgotten what he must have been told , that combat was an intermittent activity . Now he knew that the moment illuminated by the vision on the train would have to be approached . It could take place tomorrow night , or it might occur months from now . There was just too much time . Time to become afraid . White's suggestion flattered , but he did not like the identity . He did not spill over with hatred for the enemy . He hadn't even seen him yet Pressing his cigarette out in the earth , Warren walked to the slit and scanned the jagged hills . He saw no life , but still stood there for a time peering at the unlovely hills , his gaze continually returning to Papa-san . He had come here in order to test himself . While most of his beliefs were still unsettled , he knew that he did not believe in killing . Yet , he was here . He had come because he could not live out his life feeling that he had been a coward . There were ten men on the patrol which Sergeant Prevot led out that next night . The beaming ROK was carrying a thirty-caliber machine gun ; ; another man lugged the tripod and a box of ammunition . Warren and White each carried , in addition to their own weapons and ammo , a box of ammo for the ROK's machine gun . Others carried extra clips for the Browning Automatic Rifle , which was in the hands of a little Mexican named Martinez . Prevot had briefed the two new men that afternoon . `` We just sit quiet and wait '' , Prevot had said . `` Be sure the man nearest you is awake . If Joe doesn't show up , we'll all be back here at 0600 hours . Otherwise , we hold a reception . Then we pull out under our mortar and artillery cover , but nobody pulls out until I say so . Remember what I said about going out to get anybody left behind ? ? That still holds . We bring back all dead and wounded '' . At 2130 hours they had passed through the barbed wire at the point of departure . Then began the journey through their own mine fields . Mines . Ours were kinder than theirs , some said . They set bouncing betties to jump and explode at testicle level while we more mercifully had them go off at the head . Mines . Big ones and little . The crude wooden boxes of the enemy , our nicely turned gray metal disks . But theirs defied the detectors . Mines . A foot misplaced , a leg missing . Mines . All sizes : big ones , some wired to set off a whole field , little ones , hand grenade size . Booby traps to fill the head with chunks of metal . Warren tried to shake off the jumble of his fears by looking at the sky . It was dark . Prevot had said that the searchlights would be bounced off the clouds at 2230 hours , `` which gives us time to get settled in position '' . Because they were new men and to be sure that they didn't get lost , Prevot had placed Warren and White in the center of the patrol as it filed out . His eyes now fixed on White's solid figure , Warren could hear behind him the tread of another . He could also hear the stream which he had seen from his position . They were going to follow it for part of their journey . `` It's safe '' , Prevot had said , `` and it provides cover for our noise '' . Soon they were picking their way along the edge of the stream which glowed in the night . On their right rose the embankment covered with brush and trees . If a branch extended out too far , each man held it back for the next , and if they met a low overhang , each warned the other . Thus , stealthily they advanced upstream ; ; then they turned to the right , climbed the embankment , and walked into the valley again . There was no cover here , only grass sighing against pant-legs . And with each sigh , like a whip in the hand of an expert , the grass stripped something from Warren . The gentle whir of each footstep left him more naked than before , until he felt his unprotected flesh tremble , chilled by each new sound . The shapes of the men ahead of him lacked solidity , as if the whip had stripped them of their very flesh . The dark forms moved like mourners on some nocturnal pilgrimage , their dirge unsung for want of vocal chords . The warped , broken trees in the valley assumed wraith-like shapes . Clumps of brush that they passed were so many enchained demons straining in anger to tear and gnaw on his bones . Looming over all , Papa-san leered down at him , threatening a hundred hidden malevolencies . Off in the distance a searchlight flashed on , its beam slashing the sky . The sharp ray was absorbed by a cloud , then reflected to the earth in a softer , diffused radiance . Somewhere over there another patrol had need of light . Warren thought of all the men out that night who , like himself , had left their protective ridge and -- fear working at their guts -- picked their way into the area beyond . From the east to the west coast of the Korean peninsula was a strip of land in which fear-filled men were at that same moment furtively crawling through the night , sitting in sweaty anticipation of any movement or sound , or shouting amidst confused rifle flashes and muzzle blasts . White's arm went up and Warren raised his own . The patrol was stopping . Prevot came up `` . Take that spot over there '' , he whispered , pointing to a small clump of blackness . `` Give me your machine gun ammo '' . Warren handed him the metal box and Prevot quietly disappeared down the line . Lying in the grass behind the brush clump , Warren looked about . The others likewise had hidden themselves in the grass and the brush . Over his shoulder he could see Prevot with the machine gun crew . Even at this short distance they were only vague shapes , setting up the machine gun on a small knoll so that it could fire above the heads of the rest of the patrol . Warren eased his rifle's safety off and gently , slowly sneaked another clip of ammunition from one of the cloth bandoleers that marked the upper part of his body with an Aj . This he placed within quick reach . The walk and his fears had served to overheat him and his sweaty armpits cooled at the touch of the night air . Although the armored vest fitted the upper part of his body snugly , he felt no security . Figures seemed to crouch in the surrounding dark ; ; in the distance he saw a band of men who seemed to advance and retreat even as he watched . Certain this menace was only imaginary , he yet stared in fascinated horror , his hand sticky against the stock of his weapon . He was aware of insistent inner beatings , as if prisoners within sought release from his rigid body . Above , the glowing ivory baton of their searchlight pointed at the clouds , diluting the valley's dark to a pallid light . Then the figures which held his attention became a group of shattered trees , standing like the grotesques of a medieval damnation scene . Even so , he could not ease the tension of his body ; ; the rough surface of the earth itself seemed to resist every attempt on his part to relax . Sensing the unseen presence of the other men in the patrol , he felt mutely united to these nine near-strangers sharing this pinpoint of being with him . He sensed something precious in the perilous moment , something akin to the knowledge gained on his bicycle trip through the French countryside , a knowledge imprisoned in speechlessness . -- In France he had puzzled the meaning of the great stone monuments men had thrown up to the sky , and always as he wandered , he felt a stranger to their exultation . They were poems in a strange language , of which he could barely touch a meaning -- enough to make his being ache with the desire for the fullness he sensed there . Brittany , that stone-gray mystery through which he traveled for thirty days , sleeping in the barns of farmers or alongside roads , had worked some subtle change in him , he knew , and it was in Brittany that he had met Pierre . Pierre had no hands ; ; they had been severed at the wrists . With leather cups fitted in his handlebars , he steered his bicycle . He and Warren had traveled together for four days . They visited the shipyards at Brest and Pierre had to sign the register , vouching for the integrity of the visiting foreigner . He took the pen in his stumps and began to write . `` Wait ! ! Wait '' ! ! Cried the guard who ran from the hut to shout to other men standing about outside . They crowded the small room and peered over one another's shoulders to watch the handless man write his name in the book . `` C'est formidable '' , they exclaimed . `` Mais , oui . C'est merveilleux '' . And then the questions came , eager , interested questions , and many compliments on his having overcome his infirmity . `` Doesn't it ever bother you '' , Warren had asked , `` to have people always asking you about your hands '' ? ? `` Oh , the French are a very curious people '' , Pierre had laughed . `` They are also honest seekers after truth . Now the English are painfully silent about my missing hands . They refuse to mention or to notice that they are not there . The Americans , like yourself , take the fact for granted , try to be helpful , but don't ask questions . I'm used to all three , but I think the French have the healthiest attitude '' . That was the day that Pierre had told Warren about the Abbey of Solesmes . `` You are looking tired and there you can rest . It will be good for you . I think , too '' , he said , his dark eyes mischievous , `` that you will find there some clue to the secret of the cathedrals about which you have spoken '' . Within two weeks Warren was ringing the bell at the abbey gate . The monk who opened the door immediately calmed his worries about his reception : `` I speak English '' , the old man said , `` but I do not hear it very well '' . He smiled and stuck a large finger with white hairs sprouting on it into his ear as though that might help . Smiling at Warren's protestations , the old monk took his grip from him and led him down a corridor to a small parlor . `` Will you please wait in here . Mickie sat over his second whisky-on-the-rocks in a little bar next to the funeral parlor on Pennsylvania Avenue . Al's Little Cafe was small , dark , narrow , and filled with the mingled scent of beer , tobacco smoke , and Italian cooking . Hanging over the bar was an oil painting of a nude Al had accepted from a student at the Corcoran Gallery who needed to eat and drink and was broke . The nude was small and black-haired and elfin , and was called `` Eloise '' . This was one place where Moonan could go for a drink in a back booth without anyone noticing him , or at least coming up and hanging around and wanting to know all the low-down . The other patrons were taxi drivers and art students and small shopkeepers . The reporters had not yet discovered that this was his hideaway . His friend Jane was with him . She was wise enough to realize a man could be good company even if he did weigh too much and didn't own the mint . She was the widow of a writer who had died in an airplane crash , and Mickie had found her a job as head of the historical section of the Treasury . This meant sorting out press clippings and the like . Jane sat receptive and interested . Mickie had a pleasant glow as he said , `` You see , both of them , I mean the President and Jeff Lawrence , are romantics . A romantic is one who thinks the world is divinely inspired and all he has to do is find the right key , and then divine justice and altruism will appear . It's like focusing a camera ; ; the distant ship isn't there until you get the focus . You know what I'm talking about . I'm sure all girls feel this way about men until they live with them . `` But when it comes to war , the Colonel knows what it is and Jeff doesn't . Mr. Christiansen knows that a soldier will get the Distinguished Service Medal for conduct that would land him in prison for life or the electric chair as a civilian . He had a mean , unbroken sheer bastard in his outfit , and someone invented the name Trig for him . That's to say , he was trigger happy . He'd shoot at anything if it was the rear end of a horse or his own sentry . He was a wiry , inscrutable , silent country boy from the red clay of rural Alabama , and he spoke with the broad drawl that others normally make fun of . But not in front of Trig . I heard of some that tried it back in the States , and he'd knock them clear across the room . There'd been a pretty bad incident back at the Marine base . A New York kid , a refugee from one of the Harlem gangs , made fun of Trig's accent , and drew a knife . Before the fight was over , the Harlem boy had a concussion and Trig was cut up badly . They caught Trig stealing liquor from the officers' mess , and he got a couple of girls in trouble . The fear of punishment just didn't bother him . It wasn't there . It was left out of him at birth . This is why he made such a magnificent soldier . He wasn't troubled with the ordinary , rank-and-file fear that overcomes and paralyzes and sends individual soldiers and whole companies under fire running in panic . It just didn't occur to Trig that anything serious would happen to him . Do you get the picture of the kind of fellow he was '' ? ? Jane nodded with a pleasant smile . `` All right . There was a sniper's nest in a mountain cave , and it was picking off our men with devilish accuracy . The Colonel ordered that it be wiped out , and I suggested , ' You ask for volunteers , and promise each man on the patrol a quart of whisky , ten dollars and a week-end pass to Davao . Trig was one of the five volunteers . The patrol snaked around in back of the cave , approached it from above and dropped in suddenly with wild howls . You could hear them from our outpost . There was a lot of shooting . We knew the enemy was subdued , because a flare was fired as the signal . So we hurried over . Two of our men were killed , a third was wounded . Trig and a very black colored boy from Detroit had killed or put out of action ten guerrillas by grenades and hand-to-hand fighting . When we got there , Trig and the Negro were quarreling over possession of a gold crucifix around the neck of a wounded Filipino . The colored boy had it , and Trig lunged at him with a knife and said , ' Give that to me , you black bastard . We don't 'low nigras to walk on the same sidewalk with white men where I come from . `` The Negro got a bad slice on his chest from the knife wound '' . `` What did the Colonel do about the men '' ? ? Jane asked in her placid , interested way . Mickie laughed . `` He recommended both of them for the DSM and the Detroit fellow for the Purple Heart , too , for a combat-inflicted wound . So you see Mr. Christiansen knows what it's all about . But not Jeff Lawrence . When he was in the war , he was in Law or Supplies or something like that , and an old buddy of his told me he would come down on Sundays to the Pentagon and read the citations for medals -- just like the one we sent in for Trig -- and go away with a real glow . These were heroes nine feet tall to him '' . Jefferson Lawrence was alone at the small , perfectly appointed table by the window looking out over the river . He had dinner and sat there over his coffee watching the winding pattern of traffic as it crossed the bridge and spread out like a serpent with two heads . Beside him was Mrs. Dalloway . He thought how this dainty , fragile older woman threading her way through the streets of Westminster on a day in June , enjoying the flowers in the shops , the greetings from old friends , but never really drawing a deep , passionate breath , was so like himself . He , and Mrs. Dalloway , too , had never permitted themselves the luxury of joys that dug into the bone marrow of the spirit . He had not because he was both poor and ambitious . Poverty imposes a kind of chastity on the ambitious . They cannot stop to grasp and embrace and sit in the back seat of cars along a dark country lane . No , they must look the other way and climb one more painful step up the ladder . He made the decision with his eyes open , or so he thought . At any cost , he must leave the dreary Pennsylvania mining town where his father was a pharmacist . And so he had , so he had . At State College , he had no time to walk among the violets on the water's edge . From his room he could look out in springtime and see the couples hand in hand walking slowly , deliciously , across the campus , and he could smell the sweet vernal winds . He was not stone . He was not unmoved . He had to teach himself patiently that these traps were not for him . He must mentally pull the blinds and close the window , so that all that existed was in the books before him . At law school , the same . More of this stamping down of human emotion as a young lawyer in New York . By the time he was prosperous enough -- his goals were high -- he was bald and afraid of women . The only one who would have him was his cripple , the strange unhappy woman who became his wife . Perhaps it was right ; ; perhaps it was just . He had dared to defy nature , to turn his back to the Lorelei , and he was punished . Like Mrs. Dalloway , with her regrets about Peter Walsh , he had his moments of melancholy over a youth too well spent . If he had had a son , he would tell him , `` Gather ye rosebuds while ye may This same flower that smiles today tomorrow will be dying '' . But then his son could afford it . Lawrence was waiting for Bill Boxell . The Vice President had called and asked if he could see the Secretary at his home . He said the matter was urgent . The Secretary was uneasy about the visit . He did not like Boxell . He suspected something underhanded and furtive about him . Lawrence could not put his finger on it precisely , and this worried him . When you disliked or distrusted a man , you should have a reason . Human nature was not a piece of meat you could tell was bad by its smell . Lawrence stared a minute at the lighted ribbon of traffic , hoping that a clue to his dislike of the Vice President would appear . It did not . Therefore , he decided he was unfair to the young man and should make an effort to understand and sympathize with his point of view . A half hour later the Vice President arrived . He looked very carefully at every piece of furnishing , as though hoping to store this information carefully in his mind . He observed the Florentine vase in the hall , the Renoir painting in the library , as well as the long shelves of well-bound volumes ; ; the pattern of the Oriental rug , the delicate cut-glass chandelier . He said to the Secretary , `` I understand you came from a little Pennsylvania town near Wilkes-Barre . How did you find out about this '' ? ? He waved his arm around at the furnishings . It was not a discourteous question , Lawrence decided . This young man had so little time to learn he had to be curious ; ; he had to find out . The Secretary did not tell him at what cost , at what loneliness , he learned these things . He merely said , `` Any good decorator these days can make you a tasteful home '' . The Vice President said , `` If you hear of any names that would fix me cheap in return for advertising they decorated the Vice President's home , let me know . I can do business with that kind '' . Again , Lawrence thought a little sadly , these were the fees of poverty and ambition . Boxell did not have the chance to grow up graciously . He had to acquire everything he was going to get in four years . They had brandy in the library . Boxell looked at Lawrence with a searching glance , the kind that a prosecuting attorney would give a man on trial . What are your weaknesses ? ? Where will you break ? ? How best to destroy your peace ? ? The Vice President said with a slight bluster , `` There isn't anyone who loves the President more than I do . Old Chris is my ideal . At the same time , you have to face facts and realize that a man who's been in the Marine Corps all his life doesn't understand much about politics . What does a monk know about sex '' ? ? Lawrence listened with the practiced , deceptive calm of the lawyer , but his face was in the shadow . `` So , we have to protect the old man for his own good . You see what I mean . Congress is full of politicians , and if you want to get along with them , you have to be politic . This is why I say we just can't go ahead and disarm the Germans and pull down our own defenses . Let me tell you what happened to me today . A fellow came up to me , a Senator , I don't have to tell you his name , and he told me , ' I love the President like a brother , but God damn it , he's crucifying me . I've got a quarter of a million Germans in my state , and those krautheads tune in on Father Werther every night , and if he tells them to go out and piss in the public square , that's what they do . He's telling them now to write letters to their Congressmen opposing the disarmament of Germany . And another one comes to me and he says , ' Look here , there's a mill in my state employs five thousand people making uniforms for the Navy . The Bishop looked at him coldly and said , `` Take it or leave it '' ! ! Literally , there was nothing else to do . He was caught in a machine . But Sojourner was not easily excited or upset and said quite calmly : `` Let's go and see what it's like '' . Annisberg was about seventy-five miles west of Birmingham , near the Georgia border and on the Tallahoosa River , a small and dirty stream . The city was a center of manufacture , especially in textiles , and also because of the beauty of some of its surroundings , a residence for many owners of the great industries in north Alabama . But it had , as was usual in southern cities of this sort , a Black Bottom , a low region near the river where the Negroes lived -- servants and laborers huddled together in a region with no sewage save the river , where streets and sidewalks were neglected and where there was much poverty and crime . Wilson came by train from Birmingham and looked the city over ; ; the rather pleasant white city was on the hill where the chief stores were . Beyond were industries and factories . Then they went down to Black Bottom . In the midst of this crowded region was the Allen African Methodist Episcopal Church . It was an old and dirty wooden structure , sadly in need of repair . But it was a landmark . It had been there 50 years or more and everybody in town , black and white , knew of it . It had just suffered a calamity , the final crisis in a long series of calamities . For the old preacher who had been there twenty-five years was dead , and the city mourned him . He was a loud-voiced man , once vigorous but for many years now declining in strength and ability . He was stern and overbearing with his flock , but obsequious and conciliatory with the whites , especially the rich who partly supported the church . The Deacon Board , headed by a black man named Carlson , had practically taken over as the pastor grew old , and had its way with the support of the Amen corner . The characteristic thing about this church was its Amen corner and the weekly religious orgy . A knot of old worshippers , chiefly women , listened weekly to a sermon . It began invariably in low tones , almost conversational , and then gradually worked up to high , shrill appeals to God and man . And then the Amen corner took hold , re-enacting a form of group participation in worship that stemmed from years before the Greek chorus , spreading down through the African forest , overseas to the West Indies , and then here in Alabama . With shout and slow dance , with tears and song , with scream and contortion , the corner group was beset by hysteria and shivering , wailing , shouting , possession of something that seemed like an alien and outside force . It spread to most of the audience and was often viewed by visiting whites who snickered behind handkerchief and afterward discussed Negro religion . It sometimes ended in death-like trances with many lying exhausted and panting on chair and floor . To most of those who composed the Amen corner it was a magnificent and beautiful experience , something for which they lived from week to week . It was often re-enacted in less wild form at the Wednesday night prayer meeting . Wilson , on his first Sunday , witnessed this with something like disgust . He had preached a short sermon , trying to talk man-to-man to the audience , to tell them who he was , what he had done in Macon and Birmingham , and what he proposed to do here . He sympathized with them on the loss of their old pastor . But then , at mention of that name , the Amen corner broke loose . He had no chance to say another word . At the very end , when the audience was silent and breathless , a collection was taken and then slowly everyone filed out . The audience did not think much of the new pastor , and what the new pastor thought of the audience he did not dare at the time to say . During the next weeks he looked over the situation . First of all there was the parsonage , an utterly impossible place for civilized people to live in , originally poorly conceived , apparently not repaired for years , with no plumbing or sewage , with rat-holes and rot . It was arranged that he would board in the home of one of the old members of the church , a woman named Catt who , as Wilson afterward found , was briefly referred to as The Cat because of her sharp tongue and fierce initiative . Ann Catt was a lonely , devoted soul , never married , conducting a spotless home and devoted to her church , but a perpetual dissenter and born critic . She soared over the new pastor like an avenging angel lest he stray from the path and not know all the truth and gossip of which she was chief repository . Then Wilson looked over the church and studied its condition . The salary of the pastor had for years been $500 annually and even this was in arrears . Wilson made up his mind that he must receive at least $2,500 , but when he mentioned this to the Deacons they said nothing . The church itself must be repaired . It was dirty and neglected . It really ought to be rebuilt , and he determined to go up and talk to the city banks about this . Meanwhile , the city itself should be talked to . The streets in the colored section were dirty . There was typhoid and malaria . The children had nowhere to go and no place to play , not even sidewalks . The school was small , dark and ill-equipped . The teacher was a pliant fool . There were two liquor saloons not very far from the church , one white , that is conducted for white people with a side entrance for Negroes ; ; the other exclusively Negro . Undoubtedly , there was a good deal of gambling in both . On the other side of the church was a quiet , well-kept house with shutters and recently painted . Wilson inquired about it . It was called Kent House . The deacon of the church , Carlson , was its janitor . One of the leading members of the Amen corner was cook ; ; there were two or three colored maids employed there . Wilson was told that it was a sort of hotel for white people , which seemed to him rather queer . Why should a white hotel be set down in the center of Black Bottom ? ? But nevertheless it looked respectable . He was glad to have it there . The rest of Black Bottom was a rabbit warren of homes in every condition of neglect , disrepair and careful upkeep . Dives , carefully repaired huts , and nicely painted and ornamented cottages were jumbled together cheek by jowl with little distinction . The best could not escape from the worst and the worst nestled cosily beside the better . The yards , front and back , were narrow ; ; some were trash dumps , some had flower gardens . Behind were privies , for there was no sewage system . After looking about a bit , Wilson discovered beyond Black Bottom , across the river and far removed from the white city , a considerable tract of land , and it occurred to him that the church and the better Negro homes might gradually be moved to this plot . He talked about it to the Presiding Elder . The Presiding Elder looked him over rather carefully . He was not sure what kind of a man he had in hand . But there was one thing that he had to stress , and that was that the contribution to the general church expenses , the dollar money , had been seriously falling behind in this church , and that must be looked after immediately . In fact , he intimated clearly that that was the reason that Wilson had been sent here -- to make a larger contribution of dollar money . Wilson stressed the fact that clear as this was , they must have a better church , a more business-like conduct of the church organization , and an effort to get this religious center out of its rut of wild worship into a modern church organization . He emphasized to the Presiding Elder the plan of giving up the old church and moving across the river . The Presiding Elder was sure that that would be impossible . But he told Wilson to `` go ahead and try '' . And Wilson tried . It did seem impossible . The bank which held the mortgage on the old church declared that the interest was considerably in arrears , and the real estate people said flatly that the land across the river was being held for an eventual development for white working people who were coming in , and that none would be sold to colored folk . When it was proposed to rebuild the church , Wilson found that the terms for a new mortgage were very high . He was sure that he could do better if he went to Atlanta to get the deal financed . But when this proposal was made to his Deacon Board , he met unanimous opposition . The church certainly would not be removed . The very proposition was sacrilege . It had been here fifty years . It was going to stay forever . It was hardly possible to get any argument on the subject . As for rebuilding , well , that might be looked into , but there was no hurry , no hurry at all . Wilson again went downtown to a different banker , an intelligent young white man who seemed rather sympathetic , but he shook his head . `` Reverend '' , he said , `` I think you don't quite understand the situation here . Don't you see the amount of money that has been invested by whites around that church ? ? Tenements , stores , saloons , some gambling , I hope not too much . The colored people are getting employment at Kent House and other places , and they are near their places of employment . When a city has arranged things like this you cannot easily change them . Now , if I were you I would just plan to repair the old church so it would last for five or ten years . By that time , perhaps something better can be done '' . Then Wilson asked , `` What about this Kent House which you mention ? ? I don't understand why a white hotel should be down here '' . The young banker looked at him with a certain surprise , and then he said flatly : `` I'm afraid I can't tell you anything in particular about Kent House . You'll have to find out about it on your own . Hope to see you again '' . And he dismissed the colored pastor . It was next day that Sojourner came and sat beside him and took his hand . She said , `` My dear , do you know what Kent House is '' ? ? `` No '' , said Wilson , `` I don't . I was just asking about it . What is it '' ? ? `` It's a house of prostitution for white men with white girls as inmates . They hire a good deal of local labor , including two members of our Trustee Board . They buy some supplies from our colored grocers and they are patronized by some of the best white gentlemen in town '' . Wilson stared at her . `` My dear , you must be mistaken '' . `` Talk to Mrs. Catt '' , she said . And after Wilson had talked to Mrs. Catt and to others , he was absolutely amazed . This , of course , was the sort of thing that used to take place in Southern cities -- putting white houses of prostitution with colored girls in colored neighborhoods and carrying them on openly . But it had largely disappeared on account of protest by the whites and through growing resentment on the part of the Negroes as they became more educated and got better wages . But this situation of Kent House was more subtle . The wages involved were larger and more regular . The inmates were white and from out of town , avoiding local friction . The backing from the white town was greater and there was little publicity . Good wages , patronage and subscription of various kinds stopped open protest from Negroes . And yet Wilson knew that this place must go or he must go . And for him to leave this job now without accomplishing anything would mean practically the end of his career in the Methodist church , if not in all churches . Payne dismounted in Madison Place and handed the reins to Herold . There was a fog , which increased the darkness of the night . Two gas lamps were no more than a misleading glow . He might have been anywhere or nowhere . The pretence was that he was delivering a prescription from Dr. Verdi . Secretary of State Seward was a sick man . The idea had come from Herold , who had once been a chemist's clerk . The sick were always receiving medicines . No one would question such an errand . The bottle was filled up with flour . Before Payne loomed the Old Clubhouse , Seward's home , where Key had once been killed . Now it would have another death . From the outside it was an ordinary enough house of the gentry . He clomped heavily up the stoop and rang the bell . Like the bell at Mass , the doorbell was pitched too high . It was still Good Friday , after all . A nigger boy opened the door . Payne did not notice him . He was thinking chiefly of Cap . If their schedules were to synchronize , there was no point in wasting time . He pushed his way inside . For a moment the hall confused him . This was the largest house he had ever been in , almost the largest building , except for a hotel . He had no idea where Seward's room would be . In the half darkness the banisters gleamed , and the hall seemed enormous . Above him somewhere were the bedrooms . Seward would be up there . He explained his errand , but without bothering much to make it plausible , for he felt something well up in him which was the reason why he had fled the army . He did not really want to kill , but as in the sexual act , there was a moment when the impulse took over and could not be downed , even while you watched yourself giving way to it . He was no longer worried . Everything would be all right . He knew that in this mood he could not be stopped . Still , the sensation always surprised him . It was a thrill he felt no part in . He could only watch with a sort of gentle dismay while his body did these quick , appalling , and efficient things . He brushed by the idiotic boy and lumbered heavily up the stairs . They were carpeted , but made for pumps and congress gaiters , not the great clodhoppers he wore . The sound of his footsteps was like a muffled drum . At the top of the stairs he ran into somebody standing there angrily in a dressing gown . He stopped and whispered his errand . Young Frederick Seward held out his hand . Panting a little , Payne shook his head . Dr. Verdi had told him to deliver his package in person . Frederick Seward said his father was sleeping , and then went through a pantomime at his father's door , to prove the statement . `` Very well '' , Payne said . `` I will go '' . He smiled , but now that he knew where the elder Seward was , he did not intend to go . He pulled out his pistol and fired it . It made no sound . It had misfired . Reversing it , he smashed the butt down on Frederick Seward's head , over and over again . It was the first blow that was always difficult . After that , violence was exultantly easy . He got caught up into it and became a different person . Only afterwards did an act like that become meaningless , so that he would puzzle over it for days , whereas at the time it had seemed quite real . The nigger boy fled down the stairs , screaming , `` Murder '' . It was not murder at all . Payne was more methodical than that . He was merely clearing a way to what he had to do . He ran for the sick room , found his pistol was broken , and threw it away . A knife would do . From childhood he had known all about knives . Someone blocked the door from inside . He smashed it in and tumbled into darkness . He saw only dimly moving figures , but when he slashed them they yelled and fled . He went for the bed , jumped on it , and struck where he could , repeatedly . It was like finally getting into one's own nightmares to punish one's dreams . Two men pulled him off . Nobody said anything . Payne hacked at their arms . There was a lady there , in a nightdress . He would not have wanted to hurt a lady . Another man approached , this one fully dressed . When the knife went into his chest , he went down at once . `` I'm mad '' , shouted Payne , as he ran out into the hall . `` I'm mad '' , and only wished he had been . That would have made things so much easier . But he was not mad . He was only dreaming . He clattered down the stairs and out of the door . Somewhere in the fog , the nigger boy was still yelling murder . One always wakes up , even from one's own dreams . The clammy air revived him . Herold , he saw , had fled . Well , one did not expect much of people like Herold . He unhitched his horse , walked it away , mounted , and spurred it on . The nigger boy was close behind him . Then the nigger boy turned back and he was alone . He rode on and on . He had no idea where he was . After some time he came to an open field . An open field was better than a building , that was for sure , so he dismounted , turned off the horse , and plunged through the grass . He felt curiously sleepy , the world seemed far away ; ; he knew he should get to Cap , but he didn't know how . He was sure , for he had done as he was told , hadn't he ? ? Cap would find him and take care of him . So choosing a good tree , he clambered up into it , found a comfortable notch , and curled up in it to sleep , like the tousled bear he was , with his hands across his chest , as though surfeited with honey . Violence always made him tired , but he was not frightened . In Boston , Edwin Booth was winding up a performance of A New Way To Pay Old Debts . It was a part so familiar to him that he did not bother to think about it any more . Acting soothed him . On a stage he always knew what to do , and tonight , to judge by the applause , he must be doing it better than usual . As Sir Giles Overreach ( how often had he had to play that part , who did not believe a word of it ) , he raised his arm and declaimed : `` Where is my honour now '' ? ? That was one of the high spots of the play . The audience , as usual , loved it . He was delighted to see them so happy . If he had any worries , it was only the small ones , about Mother in New York , and his daughter Edwina and what she might be doing at this hour , with her Aunt Asia , in Philadelphia . Everyone is ambivalent about his profession , if he has practised it long enough , but there were still moments when he loved the stage and all those unseen people out there , who might cheer you or boo you , but that was largely , though not entirely , up to you . They made the world seem friendly somehow , though he knew it was not . 7 , Wilkes was quite right about one thing . Laura Keene had been in the green room . The commotion had brought her into the wings . Since she could not act , one part suited her as well as any other , and so she was the first person to offer Mr. Lincoln a glass of water , holding it up to the box , high above her head , to Miss Harris , who had asked for it . She had been one of the first to collect her wits . It was not so much that the shot had stunned the audience , as that they had been stunned already . Most of them had seen Our American Cousin before , and unless Miss Keene was on stage , there was not much to it . The theatre was hot and they were drugged with boredom . The stage had been empty , except for Harry Hawk , doing his star monologue . The audience was fond of Harry Hawk , he was a dear , in or out of character , but he was not particularly funny . At the end of the monologue the audience would applaud . Meanwhile it looked at the scenery . `` Well , I guess I know enough to turn you inside out , you sockdologizing old mantrap '' ! ! Said Trenchard , otherwise Hawk . There was always a pause here , before the next line . That was when the gun went off . Yet even that explosion did not mean much . Guns were going off all over Washington City these days , because of the celebrations , and the theatre was not soundproof . Then the audience saw a small , dim figure appear at the edge of the Presidential box . `` Sic semper tyrannis '' , it said mildly . Booth had delivered his line . Behind him billowed a small pungent cloud of smoke . They strained forward . They had not heard what had been said . They had been sitting too long to be able to stand up easily . The figure leapt from the box , almost lost its balance , the flag draped there tore in the air , the figure landed on its left leg , fell on its hands , and pressed itself up . Harry Hawk still had his arm raised towards the wings . His speech faltered . He did not lower his arm . The figure was so theatrically dressed , that it was as though a character from some other play had blundered into this one . The play for Saturday night was to be a benefit performance of The Octoroon . This figure looked like the slave dealer from that . But it also looked like a toad , hopping away from the light . There was something maimed and crazy about its motion that disturbed them . Then it disappeared into the wings . Harry Hawk had not shifted position , but he at last lowered his arm . Mrs. Lincoln screamed . There was no mistaking that scream . It was what anyone who had ever seen her had always expected her to do . Yet this scream had a different note in it . That absence of an urgent self-indulgence dashed them awake like a pail of water . Clara Harris , one of the guests in the box , stood up and demanded water . Her action was involuntary . When something unexpected happened , one always asked for water if one were a woman , brandy if one were a man . Mrs. Lincoln screamed again . In the Presidential box someone leaned over the balustrade and yelled : `` He has shot the President '' ! ! That got everybody up . On the stage , Harry Hawk began to weep . Laura Keene brushed by him with the glass of water . The crowd began to move . In Washington City everyone lived in a bubble of plots , and one death might attract another . It was not exactly panic they gave way to , but they could not just sit there . The beehive voices , for no one could bear silence , drowned out the sound of Mrs. Lincoln's weeping . At the rear of the auditorium , upstairs , some men tried to push open the door to the box corridor . It would not give . A Dr. Charles Taft clambered up on the stage and got the actors to hoist him up to the box . In the audience a man named Ferguson lost his head and tried to rescue a little girl from the mob , on the same principle which had led Miss Harris to demand water . Someone opened the corridor door from the inside , and called for a doctor . Somehow Dr. Charles Leale was forced through the mob and squeezed out into the dingy corridor . He went straight to the Presidential box . As usual , Mrs. Lincoln had lost her head , but nobody blamed her for doing so now . There was a little blood on the hem of her dress , for the assassin had slashed Miss Harris's companion , Major Rathbone , with a knife . Rathbone said he was bleeding to death . By the look of him he wasn't that far gone . With a sneer , the man spread his legs and , a third time , confronted them . Once more , Katie reared , and whinnied in fear . For a moment , boy and mount hung in midair . Stevie twisted and , frantically , commanded the mare to leap straight ahead . But the stranger was nimbler still . With a bold arm , he dared once more to obstruct them . Katie reared a third time , then , trembling , descended . The stranger leered . Seizing the bridle , he tugged with all his might and forced Katie to her knees . It was absurd . Stevie could feel himself toppling . He saw the ground coming up -- and the stranger's head . With incredible ferocity , he brought his fists together and struck . The blow encountered silky hair and hard bone . The man uttered a weird cry , spun about , and collapsed in the sand . Katie scrambled to her feet , Stevie agilely retaining his seat . Again Katie reared , and now , wickedly , he compelled her to bring her hooves down again and again upon the sprawled figure of the stranger . He could feel his own feet , iron-shod , striking repeatedly until the body was limp . He gloated , and his lips slavered . He heard himself chortling . They rode around and around to trample the figure into the sand . Only the top of the head , with a spot bare and white as a clamshell , remained visible . Stevie was shouting triumphantly . A train hooted . Instantly , he chilled . They were pursuing him . He was frightened ; ; his fists clutched so tightly that his knuckles hurt . Then Katie stumbled , and again he was falling , falling ! ! `` Stevie ! ! Stevie '' ! ! His mother was nudging him , but he was still falling . His head hung over the boards of Katie's stall ; ; before it was sprawled the mangled corpse of the bearded stranger . `` Stevie , wake up now ! ! We're nearly there '' . He had been dreaming . He was safe in his Mama's arms . The train had slowed . Houses winked as the cars rolled beside a little depot . `` Po' Chavis '' ! ! The trainman called . He came by and repeated , `` Po' Chavis '' ! ! Chapter 6 Bong ! ! Bong ! ! Startled him awake . The room vibrated as if a giant hand had rocked it . Bong ! ! A dull boom and a throbbing echo . The walls bulged , the floor trembled , the windowpanes rattled . He stared at the far morning , expecting a pendulum to swing across the horizon . Bong ! ! He raced to the window and yanked at the sash . Bong ! ! The wood was old , the paint alligatored . Bong ! ! A fresh breeze saluted him . Six o'clock ! ! He put his head out . There was the slate roof of the church ; ; ivy climbed the red brick walls like a green-scaled monster . The clock which had struck presented an innocent face . In the kitchen Mama was wiping the cupboards . `` There's a tower and a steeple on the church a million feet high . And the loudest clock in the whole world '' ! ! `` I know , Stephen '' , she smiled . `` They say that our steeple is one hundred and sixty-two feet high . The clock you heard strike -- it's really the town clock -- was installed last April by Mrs. Shorter , on her birthday '' . He dressed , and sped outdoors . He crossed Broome Street to Orange Square . The steeple leaned backward , while the church advanced like a headless creature in a long , shapeless coat . The spire seemed to hold up the sky . Port Jervis , basking in the foothills , was the city of God . The Dutch Reformed Church , with two steeples and its own school was on Main Street ; ; the Episcopal Church was one block down Sussex Street ; ; the Catholic Saint Mary's Church , with an even taller steeple and a cross on top , stood on Ball Street . The Catholics had the largest cemetery , near the Neversink River where Main Street ran south ; ; Stevie whistled when he passed these alien grounds . God was everywhere , in the belfry , in the steeple , in the clouds , in the trees , and in the mountains hulking on the horizon . Somewhere , beyond , where shadows lurked , must be the yawning pit of which Papa preached and the dreadful Lake of Fire . So , walking in awe , he became familiar with God , who resided chiefly in Drew Centennial Church with its high steeple and clock . There was no church like Drew Church , no preacher like Papa , who was intimate with Him , and could consign sinners to hellfire . To know God he must follow in Papa's footsteps . He was fortunate , and proud . The veterans , idling on their benches in the Square , beneath the soldiers' monument , got to their feet when Papa approached : `` Morning , Reverend '' ! ! His being and His will -- Stevie could not divide God from his Papa -- illumined every parish face , turned the choir into a band of angels , and the pulpit into the tollgate to Heaven . `` We have nine hundred and eleven members in our charge '' , Mama announced , `` and three hundred and eighty Sunday-school scholars '' . When Papa went out to do God's work , Stevie often accompanied him in the buggy , which was drawn by Violet , the new black mare . Although they journeyed westerly as far as Germantown , beyond the Erie roundhouse and the machine shop , and along the Delaware and Hudson Canal , and northward to Brooklyn , below Point Peter , he could see the church spire wherever he looked back . Sometimes they went south and rolled past the tollhouse -- `` Afternoon , Reverend '' ! ! -- and crossed the suspension bridge to Matamoras ; ; that was Pennsylvania . In the Delaware River , three long islands were overgrown with greening trees and underbrush . South of Laurel Grove Cemetery , and below the junction of the Neversink and the Delaware , was the Tri-State Rock , from which Stevie could spy New Jersey and Pennsylvania , as well as New York , simply by spinning around on his heel . On these excursions , Papa instructed him on man's chief end , which was his duty to God and his own salvation . However , a boy's lively eyes might rove . Where Cuddleback Brook purled into the Neversink was a magnificent swimming hole . Papa pointed a scornful finger at the splashing youth : `` Idle recreation '' ! ! Stevie saw no idols ; ; it troubled him that he couldn't always see what Papa saw . He was torn between the excitement in the sun-inflamed waters and a little engine chugging northward on the Monticello Branch . `` Where you been today '' ? ? Ludie inquired every evening , pretending that he did not care . `` He'll make a preacher out of you '' ! ! `` No , he won't '' ! ! Stevie flared . `` Not me '' ! ! `` Somebody's got to be a preacher in the family . He made a will and last testament before we left Paterson . I heard them ! ! Uncle and Aunt Howe were the witnesses '' . `` Will he die '' ? ? `` Everybody does '' . Ludie could be hateful . To speak of Papa dying was a sin . It could never happen as long as God was alert and the Drew steeple stood guard with its peaked lance . Stevie was constantly slipping into the church . He pulled with all his strength at the heavy , brass-bound door , and shuffled along the wainscoted wall . The cold , mysterious presence of God was all around him . At the end of a shaft of light , the pews appeared to be broad stairs in a long dungeon . Far away , standing before a curtained window in the study room , was his father , hands tucked under his coattails , and staring into the dark church . The figure was wreathed in an extraordinary luminescence . The boy shuddered at the deathly pale countenance with its wrinkles and gray hair . Would Papa really die ? ? The mouth was thin-lipped and wide , the long cleft in the upper lip like a slide . When Papa's slender fingers removed the spectacles , there were red indentations on the bridge of the strong nose . `` It's time you began to think on God , Stephen . Perhaps one day He will choose you as He chose me , long ago . Therefore , give Him your affection and store up His love for you . Open your heart to Him and pray , Stephen , pray ! ! For His mercy and His guidance to spare you from evil and eternal punishment in the Lake of Fire '' . Stevie had heard these words many times , yet on each occasion they caused him to tremble . For he feared the Lake of Fire . He strove to think of God and His eternal wrath ; ; he must pray to be spared . Papa was disappointed that none of the brothers had heard the Call . Not George , Townley , or Ted , certainly not Ludie . Burt was at Hackettstown and Will at Albany Law School , where they surely could not hear it . Someday God would choose him . He would hear the Call and would run to tell Papa . The stern face would relax , the black-clad arms would embrace him , `` My son '' ! ! Yet how might he know the Call when it came ? ? Probably , as in Scriptures , a still , small voice would whisper . It would summon him once ; ; if he missed it , never again . What if it came when he was playing , or was asleep and dreaming ? ? He must not fail to hear it . He was Papa's chosen ; ; therefore , nothing but good could happen to him , even in God's wrathful storms . When the skies grew dark and thunder rolled across the valley , he was unafraid . Aggie might fly into a closet , shut the door and bury her head in the clothes ; ; he dared to wait for the lightning . Lightning could strike you blind if you were a sinner ! ! But he was good . He clenched his fists and faced the terror . Thunder crashed ; ; barrels tumbled down the mountainsides , and bounced and bounced till their own fury split them open . Lightning might strike the steeples of the other churches ; ; not of Drew Church . A flash illumined the trees as a crooked bolt twigged in several directions . Violet whinnied from the stable . He ran out into the downpour , sped across the yard and into the buggy room . `` Don't be afraid , Violet '' ! ! He shouted , and was aghast at the echoes . `` Don't you be afraid '' ! ! He would save her . If there was a fire or a flood he would save Mama first and Violet next . Drenched and shaking , he stood near the sweet-smelling stall and dared to pat her muzzle . `` Don't you be afraid , Violet '' ! ! After the storm , the sky cleared blue and cool , and fragrant air swept the hills . When the sun came out , Stevie strode proudly into Orange Square , smiling like a landlord on industrious tenants . The fountain had brimmed over , the cannon were wet , the soldiers' monument glistened . Even before the benches had dried , the Civil War veterans were straggling back to their places . The great spire shone as if the lightning had polished it . He jumped . The pointed shadow had nearly touched him . He trailed Ludie to the baseball game in the lot on Kingston Street near the Dutch Reformed . `` Go on home '' ! ! Ludie screeched at him . `` Someone'll tell Papa '' ! ! No one told on Ludie , not even when he slipped live grasshoppers into the mite-box . Ludie did as he pleased . Ludie took his slingshot and climbed to the rooftop to shoot at crows . Ludie chewed roofer's tar . Ludie had a cigar box full of marbles and shooters , and a Roman candle from last Fourth of July . Ludie hopped rides on freight cars , and was chased by Mr. Yankton , the railroad guard . He came home overheated , ran straight to the ice-chest , and gulped shivery cold water . Stevie envied him . That Ludie ! ! He , too , cocked his cap at a jaunty angle , jingled marbles in his pocket , and swaggered down Main Street . On the Christophers' lawn , little girls in white pinafores were playing grownups at a tea party . A Newfoundland sat solemnly beside a doghouse half his size . Stevie yearned for a dog . He wondered whether God had a dog in the sky . He meandered down Pike Street , past the First National Bank with its green window shades . He crossed the tracks to Delaware House , where ladies in gay dresses and men in straw boaters and waxed mustaches crowded the verandah . A tall lady , with a ruffled collar very low on her bosom , turned insolent green eyes upon him . She was taller than Aggie . She was so beautiful with her rosy mouth and haughty air that she had to be wicked . Fiddles screeched ; ; a piano tinkled . `` P. J. '' -- as Ludie called the town -- was crowded with summer people who came to the mountains to escape the heat in the big cities . They stayed at hotels and boardinghouses , or at private homes . Rich people went to Delaware House , Opera House , American House or Fowler House . If the crummy bastard could write ! ! That's how it should be . It's those two fucken niggers ! ! Krist , I wish they could write ! ! Nigger pussy . He thought of sweet wet nigger pussy . Oh , sweet land of heaven , haint there just nothin like sweet nigger pussy ! ! He thought of her , the first one . He had caught her coming out of the shack . She was a juicy one . Oh how they bounced ! ! Fresh , warm , sweet and juicy , sweet lovin sixteen , she was . Man , how I love nigger pussy ! ! The snow came a little faster now , he noted . He thought of Joe Harris , the nigger who had gone after his sister . He chuckled , the memory vivid . Jee-sus , We Fixed him ! ! Yooee , we fixed him ! ! The snow again . If only the fucken weather wasn't so lousy ! ! Goddamn niggers , Lord . What I have to put up with ! ! Sonuvabitch , I can't figure out what in hell for they went and put niggers in my squad for . Only one worth a shit , and that's Brandon . He ain't so bad . His thoughts turned to other things . The big shock everybody had when they found ol Slater and those others done for . Kaboom for . He had been pretty scared himself , wondering what the hell was coming off . But he soon saw which way the ball was bouncing . Soon came back to his senses . `` I soon came back to my senses '' , he said , aloud , to the young blizzard , proudly , drawing himself up , as if making a report to some important superior . I was the first to get my squad on the ball , and anybody thinkin it was easy is pretty damn dumb . Look at thum . That goddamn redheader was the worst . He kept sayin , not me , not me , I don't wanta wind up like em . But I told him , goddammit . `` I told him '' , he said aloud They'll get the guys that done it . That'll put the place back to normal . Normal , by God . Maybe it's a good thing it happened . Maybe they'll stop it now , once for all . Clean the place up . They're doin it now . I hear the whole bunch is croakin out in the snow . They'll get the guys that done it . There was something troubling him though : as yet they hadn't Five days . Keerist . Prickly twinges of annoyance ran through him . His eyes blinked hard , snapping on and squashing some bad things that were trying to push their way into him . A tune began to whirl inside his head . One of his favorites : `` Guitar Boogie '' . It always came on , faithfully , just like a radio or juke box , whenever he started to worry too much about something , when the bad things tried to push their way into him . The music drove them off , or away , and he was free to walk on air in a very few moments , humming and jiving within , beating the rhythm within . He glowed with anticipation about what would happen to the culprits when they caught them . Turn the bastards over to me -- to me and my boys -- no nigger ever got what would be comin to them -- reactionary bastards . He had never heard the word reactionary before his life as a POW began . It was a word he was proud of , a word that meant much to him , and he used it with great pleasure , almost as if it were an exclusive possession , and more : he sensed himself to be very highly educated , four cuts above any of the folks back home . `` Four cuts at least '' , he chuckled to himself , `` and I owe it all to them '' . The word also made him feel hate , sincere hate , for those so labeled . He used it very effectively when he wanted to get his squad on the ball . It came up again and again in the discussion sessions . Lousy Reactionary bastards been tryin to fuck up the Program for months . Months . Hired , hard lackeys of the Warmongering capitalists . Not captured , sent here . To fuck up the program . You guys remember that . Remember that He heard himself haranguing them . He saw himself before them delivering the speech . He laughed , suddenly , feeling a surge of power telling him of his hold over them , seeing himself before them , receiving utmost respect and attention . One day , Ching had told him ( smiling , patting him on the back ) as they walked to the weekly conference of squad leaders , `` Keep it up , your squad is good , one of the best , keep it up , keep up the good work '' . He would ! ! That was really something , coming from Ching . `` Really something '' , he said , aloud . Dirty Reactionary bastards comin down here in the night and bumpin off ol Slater and those other poor bastards . `` They'll get them by God and let them bring them down here to me , just let them , God , I'll slice their balls right off . '' His arm moved swiftly , violently , once , twice . He felt intense satisfaction . He was tingling within . Before him , mutilated , bleeding to death , they lay . It was as if it had been done . `` Bastards '' , he said aloud , spitting on them . He halted , and looked around . Rivers of cold sweat were suddenly unleashed within him . The thought came back , the one nagging at him these past four days . He tried to stifle it . But the words were forming . He knew he couldn't . He braced himself . Somebody'll hafta start thinkin . He fought it , seeking to kill the last few words , but on they came out . He was trembling , a strange feeling upon him , fully expecting some catastrophe to strike him dead on the spot . But it didn't . And he took heart ; ; the final word came forth . Now he heard it , fully ; ; `` bout takin his place '' He listened , waited , nothing happened . He felt good . His old self . The music arrived , taking him its rhythm . Stroked him , snaked all through him , the lyrics lifted him , took him from one magic isle to another , stopping briefly at each Brandon . He is good . Damn good . But a nigger . Johnson . Jesus , the guy says he is trying . But he isn't with it , not at all with it . When I talked to Ching about it , he said , Everyone can learn , if he is not a Reactionary or lazy . No one is stupid . That's what he said . He oughta know . It is plain as hell Johnson is no reactionary . So you're not tryin , Johnson , you bastard you . He looked over at him , lying there , asleep , and he felt a wave of revulsion . How he loathed him . Sleepy-eyed , soft-spoken Johnson , Biggest thorn in my side of the whole fucken squad . He was the guy what always goofed at Question Time . Why couldn't they have dumped him off on someone else ? ? Why me ? ? Why didn't the damn Reactionaries bump him off ? ? Why Slater ? ? Like a particle drawn to a magnet he returned to that which was pressing so hard in his mind . The music surged up , but it failed to check it . Who is the man to take His place ? ? The guy with most on the Ball . Most on the ball . Handle men . Thoroughly Wised up . Knows the score With a supreme effort , he broke it off . He turned to the window again . A gnawing and gnashing within him . The snow was tumbling down furiously now . Huge glob-flakes hitting the ground , piling higher and higher . He stared at it , amazed , alarmed . The whole fucken sky's cavin in ! ! Keeeerist ! ! Lookit it ! ! Cover the whole building , bury us all , by nightfall . Jesus ! ! Somebody , got to be somebody If I don't put my two cents in soon , somebody else will I know they're waitin only for one thing : for the bastards what done it to be nailed . Maybe they already got them . He was again tingling with pleasure , seeing himself clearly in Slater's shoes . Top dog , sleeping and eating right there with the Staff . Ching , Tien , all of them . Top dog . Poor ol Slater . Jesus , imagine , the crummy bastards , they'll get em , they'll get what's comin to em . He whirled about suddenly . It was nothing , though his heart was thumping wildly . Somebody was up . That was all . `` Boy , you're stirrin early '' , a sleepy voice said . `` Yehhh '' , said Coughlin , testily , eyeing him up and down . `` Lookit that come down , willya '' , said the man , scratching himself , yawning . `` Yehhh '' , said Coughlin , practically spitting on him . The man moved away . That's the way . They'll toe the line . Goddamn it . Keep the chatter to a minimum , short answers , one word , if possible . Less bull the more you can do with em . That's Brown's trouble . All he does is to bullshit with his squad , and they are the stupidest bastards around . Just about to get their asses kicked into hut Seven . Plenty of room there now . All those dumb 8-Balls croaked . You can do anything with these dumb fucks if you know how . Anything . They'd cut their mothers' belly open . Give um the works . See , he's already snapping it up , the dumb jerk . Coughlin grinned , feeling supremely on top of things . He watched the snow once again . It infuriated him . It made no sense to him . He whirled around , suddenly hot all over , finding the man who had been standing before him a few moments back , nailing him to the spot on which he now stood , open-mouthed . `` You , Listen ! ! -- name William Foster's Four Internal Contradictions in Capitalism . Quick -- Quick -- now '' ! ! The man shrank before the hot fury , searching frantically for the answer . Finnegan woke up . There was a hell of a noise this time of morning . He stared out the window . For Christ's sake ! ! The whole fucken sky's caved in ! ! He looked for the source of the noise that had awakened him . It was that prick Coughlin . What the hell was he up to now ? ? Why didn't he drop dead ? ? How did they miss him when they got Slater ? ? How ? ? Then he was asking himself the usual early morning questions : What the Hell am I doin here ? ? Is this a nut-house ? ? Am I nuts ? ? Is this for real ? ? Am I dreamin ? ? From somewhere in the hut came Coughlin's voice . `` How long did you study ? ? How long , buddy '' ? ? `` For Christ's sake '' ! ! A voice pleaded . `` Don't Christsake me , buddy ! ! Just answer . C'mon -- 'mon ! ! '' I'm no hero . Did I start the damn war ? ? Automatically , Finnegan started going over today's lesson . Capitalism rots from the core . Did I start the damn war ? ? Who did ? ? That's a good one . I thought I knew . Why don't Uncle Sam mind his own fucken business ? ? I'll bet both together did . I bet . So fuck them both . Goddamn . Goddammit . Just let me go home to Jersey , back to the shore , oh , Jesus , the shore . The waves breakin in on you and your girl at night there on the warm beach in the moonlight . If I hafta do this to stay alive by God I'll do it . I hated the goddamn army from the first day I got in anyhow . All pricks like Coughlin run it anyway , one way or another . Fuck them . He rolled over and tried to shut out the noise , now much louder . He snuggled into the blanket . Brandon dreamed . He was sitting on top of a log which was spinning round and around in the water . A river , wide as the Missouri , where it ran by his place . The log was spinning . But he was not . So what ? ? Why should I be spinning just because the goddamn log is spinning ? ? ( he asked this out loud , but no one heard it over the other noise in the hut ) . Over on the bank , the west bank , a man stood , calling to him . He couldn't make out what he was saying . No doubt it had to do with the log . Why should he be concerned ? ? Rousseau is so persuasive that Voltaire is almost convinced that he should burn his books , too . But while the two men are riding into the country , where they are going to dinner , they are attacked in the dark of the forest by a band of thieves , who strip them of everything , including most of their clothes . `` You must be a very learned man '' , says Voltaire to one of the bandits . `` A learned man '' ? ? The bandit laughs in his face . But Voltaire perseveres . He goes to the chief himself . `` At what university did you study '' ? ? He asks . He refuses to believe that the bandit chief never attended a higher institution . `` To have become so corrupt '' , he says , `` surely you must have studied many arts and sciences '' . The chief , annoyed by these questions , knocks Voltaire down and shouts at him that he not only never went to any school , but never even learned how to read . When finally the two bedraggled men reach their friend's home , Voltaire's fears are once again aroused . For it is such a distinguished place , with such fine works of art and such a big library , that there can be little doubt but that the owner has become depraved by all this culture . To Voltaire's surprise , however , their host gives them fresh clothes to put on , opens his purse to lend them money and sits them down before a good dinner . Immediately after dinner , however , Rousseau asks for still another favor . Could he have pen and paper , please ? ? He is in a hurry to write another essay against culture . Such was the impromptu that Voltaire gave to howls of laughter at Sans Souci and that was soon circulated in manuscript throughout the literary circles of Europe , to be printed sometime later , but with the name of Timon of Athens , the famous misanthrope , substituted for that of Rousseau . How cruel ! ! But at the same time how understandable . How could the rich , for whom life was made so simple , ever understand the subterfuges , the lies , the frauds , the errors , sins and even crimes to which the poor were driven in their efforts to overcome the great advantages the rich had in the race of life ? ? How , for example , could a Voltaire understand the strange predicament in which a Rousseau would find himself when , soon after the furor of his first Discourse , he acquired still another title to fame ? ? This time as a musician . As a composer . Ever since he had first begun to study music and to teach it , Rousseau had dreamed of piercing through to fame as the result of a successful opera . But his facility in this genre was not great . And his efforts to get a performance for his Gallant Muses invariably failed . And for good reasons . His operatic music had little merit . But then one day , while on a week's visit to the country home of a retired Swiss jeweler , Rousseau amused the company with a few little melodies he had written , to which he attached no great importance . He was really amazed to discover the other guests so excited about these delicate little songs . `` Put a few such songs together '' , they urged him . `` String them onto some sort of little plot , and you'll have a delightful operetta '' . He didn't believe them . `` Nonsense '' , he said . `` This is the sort of stuff I write and then throw away '' ! ! `` Heaven forbid '' ! ! Cried the ladies , enchanted by his music . `` You must make an opera out of this material '' . And they wouldn't leave off arguing and pleading until he had promised . Oh , the irony and the bitterness of it ! ! That after all his years of effort to become a composer , he should now , now when he was still stoutly replying to the critics of his Discourse on the Arts and Sciences , be so close to a success in music and have to reject it . Or at least appear to reject it ! ! But what else could he do ? ? You couldn't on the one hand decry the arts and at the same time practice them , could you ? ? Well , yes , perhaps in literature , since you could argue that you couldn't keep silent about your feelings against literature and so were involved in spite of yourself . But now music too ? ? No . That would be too much ! ! And the fault , of course , was Rameau's . The fault was Rameau's and that of the whole culture of this Parisian age . For it was Rameau's type of music that he had been trying to write , and that he couldn't write . These little songs , however , were sweet nothings from the heart , tender memories of his childhood , little melodies that anyone could hum and that would make one want to weep . But no . He couldn't appear as a composer now . That glory , craved for so long , was now forbidden to him . Still , just for the ladies , and just for this once , for this one weekend in the country , he would make a little piece out of his melodies . The ladies were delighted and Jean Jacques was applauded . And everyone went to work to learn the parts which he wrote . But then , after the little operetta had been given its feeble amateur rendering , everyone insisted that it was too good to be lost forever , and that the Royal Academy of Music must now have the manuscript in order to give it the really first-rate performance it merited . Rousseau was aware that he must seem like a hypocrite , standing there and arguing that he could not possibly permit a public performance . The ladies especially couldn't understand what troubled him . A contradiction ? ? Bah , what was a contradiction in one's life ? ? Every woman has had the experience of saying no when she meant yes , and saying yes when she meant no . Rousseau had to admit that though he couldn't agree to a public performance , he would indeed , just for his own private satisfaction , dearly love to know how his work would sound when done by professional musicians and by trained voices . `` I'd simply like to know if it is as good as you kind people seem to think '' , he said . Duclos , the historian , pointed out to Jean Jacques that this was impossible . The musicians of the Royal Opera would not rehearse a work merely to see how it would sound . Merely to satisfy the author's curiosity . Rousseau agreed . But he recalled that Rameau had once had a private performance of his opera Armide , behind closed doors , just for himself alone . Duclos understood what was bothering Rousseau : that the writer of the Prosopopoeia of Fabricius should now become known as the writer of an amusing little operetta . That would certainly be paradoxical . But Duclos thought he saw a way out . `` Let me do the submitting to the Royal Academy '' , he suggested . `` Your name will never appear . No one will even suspect that it is your work '' . To that Rousseau could agree . But now what crazy twists and turns of his emotions ! ! Afraid at one and the same time that his work might be turned down -- which would be a blow to his pride even though no one knew he was the author -- and that the work would be accepted , and then that his violent feelings in the matter would certainly betray how deeply concerned he was in spite of himself . And how anxious this lover of obscurity was for applause ! ! And thus torn between his desire to be known as the composer of a successful opera and the necessity of remaining true to his proclaimed desire for anonymity , Rousseau suffered through several painful weeks . All these emotions were screwed up to new heights when , after acceptance and the first rehearsals , there ensued such a buzz of excitement among Parisian music lovers that Duclos had to come running to Rousseau to inform him that the news had reached the superintendent of the King's amusements , and that he was now demanding that the work be offered first at the royal summer palace of Fontainebleau . Imagine the honor of it ! ! `` What was your answer '' ? ? Jean Jacques asked , striving to appear unimpressed . `` I refused '' , Duclos said . `` What else could I do ? ? Monsieur De Cury was incensed , of course . But I said I would first have to get the author's permission . And I was certain he would refuse '' . How infuriating all this was ! ! Why had not this success come to him before he had plunged into his Discourse , and before he had committed himself to a life of austerity and denial ? ? Now , when everything was opening up to him -- even the court of Louis 15 ! ! -- he had to play a role of self-effacement . Back and forth Duclos had to go , between M. De Cury and Jean Jacques and between the Duke D'Aumont and Jean Jacques again , as his little operetta , The Village Soothsayer , though still unperformed , took on ever more importance . And of course the news of who the composer was did finally begin to get around among his closest friends . But they , naturally , kept his secret well , and the public at large knew only of a great excitement in musical and court circles . How titillating it was to go among people who did not know him as the composer , but who talked in the most glowing terms of the promise of the piece after having heard the first rehearsals . The furor was such that people who could not possibly have squirmed their way into the rehearsals were pretending that they were intimate with the whole affair and that it would be sensational . And listening to such a conversation one morning while taking a cup of chocolate in a cafe , Rousseau found himself bathed in perspiration , trembling lest his authorship become known , and at the same time dreaming of the startling effect he would make if he should proclaim himself suddenly as the composer . He felt himself now , as he himself says in his Confessions , at a crucial point of his life . And that was why , on the day of the performance , when a carriage from the royal stables called to take him to the palace , he did not bother to shave . On the contrary , he was pleased that his face showed a neglect of several days . Seeing him in that condition , and about to enter the hall where the King , the Queen , the whole royal family and all the members of the highest aristocracy would be present , Grimm and the Abbe Raynal and others tried to stop him . `` You can't go in that way '' ! ! They cried . `` Why not '' ? ? Jean Jacques asked . `` Who is going to stop me '' ? ? `` You haven't dressed for the occasion '' ! ! They pointed out to him . `` I'm dressed as I always am '' , Rousseau said . `` Neither better nor worse '' . `` At home , yes '' , they argued . `` But here you are in the palace . There's the King . And Madame De Pompadour '' . `` If they are here , then surely I have the right to be here '' , Rousseau said . `` And even more right . Since I am the composer '' ! ! `` But in such a slovenly condition '' . `` What is slovenly about me '' ? ? Rousseau asked . `` Is it because of my slovenliness that hair grows on my face ? ? Surely it would grow there whether I washed myself or not . A hundred years ago I would have worn a beard with pride . And those without beards would have stood out as not dressed for the occasion . Now times have changed , and I must pretend that hair doesn't grow on my face . That's the fashion . And fashion is the real king here . Not Louis 15 , , since even he obeys . Now , if you don't mind , I should like to hear my own piece performed '' . But of course behind his boldness he didn't feel bold at all . He trembled lest his piece should fail . And this in addition to his usual fear of being among people of high society , his fear of making some inane or inappropriate remark . And even deeper than that : his fear lest in this closed hall he should suddenly itch to relieve himself . Could he walk out in the midst of his piece ? ? Here , before the court ? ? Before the King ? ? It was the first time any of us had laughed since the morning began . The rider from Concord was as good as his word . He came spurring and whooping down the road , his horse kicking up clouds of dust , shouting : `` They're a-coming ! ! By God , they're a-coming , they are '' ! ! We heard him before he ever showed , and we heard him yelling after he was out of sight . Solomon Chandler hadn't misjudged the strength of his lungs , not at all . I think you could have heard him a mile away , and he was bursting at every seam with importance . I have observed that being up on a horse changes the whole character of a man , and when a very small man is up on a saddle , he'd like as not prefer to eat his meals there . That's understandable , and I appreciate the sentiment . As for this rider , I never saw him before or afterwards and never saw him dismounted , so whether he stood tall or short in his shoes , I can't say ; ; but I do know that he gave the day tone and distinction . The last thing in the world that resembled a war was our line of farmers and storekeepers and mechanics perched on top of a stone wall , and this dashing rider made us feel a good deal sharper and more alert to the situation . We came down off the wall as if he had toppled all of us , and we crouched behind it . I have heard people talk with contempt about the British regulars , but that only proves that a lot of people talk about things of which they are deplorably ignorant . Whatever we felt about the redcoats , we respected them in terms of their trade , which was killing ; ; and I know that I , myself , was nauseated with apprehension and fear and that my hands were soaking wet where they held my gun . I wanted to wipe my flint , but I didn't dare to , the state my hands were in , just as I didn't dare to do anything about the priming . The gun would fire or not , just as chance willed . I put a lot more trust in my two legs than in the gun , because the most important thing I had learned about war was that you could run away and survive to talk about it . The gunfire , which was so near that it seemed just a piece up the road now , stopped for long enough to count to twenty ; ; and in that brief interval , a redcoat officer came tearing down the road , whipping his horse fit to kill . I don't know whether he was after our rider , who had gone by a minute before , or whether he was simply scouting conditions ; ; but when he passed us by , a musket roared , and he reared his horse , swung it around , and began to whip it back in the direction from which he had come . He was a fine and showy rider , but his skill was wasted on us . From above me and somewhere behind me , a rifle cracked . The redcoat officer collapsed like a punctured bolster , and the horse reared and threw him from the saddle , except that one booted foot caught in the stirrup . Half crazed by the weight dragging , the dust , and the heat , the horse leaped our wall , dashing out the rider's brains against it , and leaving him lying there among us -- while the horse crashed away through the brush . It was my initiation to war and the insane symphony war plays ; ; for what had happened on the common was only terror and flight ; ; but this grinning , broken head , not ten feet away from me , was the sharp definition of what my reality had become . And now the redcoats were coming , and the gunfire was a part of the dust cloud on the road to the west of us . I must state that the faster things happened , the slower they happened ; ; the passage and rhythm of time changed , and when I remember back to what happened then , each event is a separate and frozen incident . In my recollection , there was a long interval between the death of the officer and the appearance of the first of the retreating redcoats , and in that interval the dust cloud over the road seems to hover indefinitely . Yet it could not have been more than a matter of seconds , and then the front of the British army came into view . It was only hours since I had last seen them , but they had changed and I had changed . In the very front rank , two men were wounded and staggered along , trailing blood behind them . No drummers here , no pipers , and the red coats were covered with a fine film of dust . They marched with bayonets fixed , and as fixed on their faces was anger , fear , and torment . Rank after rank of them came down the road , and the faces were all the same , and they walked in a sea of dust . `` Committeemen , hold your fire ! ! Hold your fire '' ! ! A voice called , and what made it even more terrible and unreal was that the redcoat ranks never paused for an instant , only some of them glancing toward the stone wall , from behind which the voice came . The front of their column had already passed us , when another officer came riding down the side of the road , not five paces from where we were . My Cousin Simmons carried a musket , but he had loaded it with bird shot , and as the officer came opposite him , he rose up behind the wall and fired . One moment there was a man in the saddle ; ; the next a headless horror on a horse that bolted through the redcoat ranks , and during the next second or two , we all of us fired into the suddenly disorganized column of soldiers . One moment , the road was filled with disciplined troops , marching four by four with a purpose as implacable as death ; ; the next , a cloud of gun smoke covered a screaming fury of sound , out of which the redcoat soldiers emerged with their bayonets and their cursing fury . In the course of this , they had fired on us ; ; but I have no memory of that . I had squeezed the trigger of my own gun , and to my amazement , it had fired and kicked back into my shoulder with the force of an angry mule ; ; and then I was adding my own voice to the crescendo of sound , hurling more vile language than I ever thought I knew , sobbing and shouting , and aware that if I had passed water before , it was not enough , for my pants were soaking wet . I would have stood there and died there if left to myself , but Cousin Simmons grabbed my arm in his viselike grip and fairly plucked me out of there ; ; and then I came to some sanity and plunged away with such extraordinary speed that I outdistanced Cousin Simmons by far . Everyone else was running . Later we realized that the redcoats had stopped their charge at the wall . Their only hope of survival was to hold to the road and keep marching . We tumbled to a stop in Deacon Gordon's cow hole , a low-lying bit of pasture with a muddy pool of water in its middle . A dozen cows mooed sadly and regarded us as if we were insane , as perhaps we were at that moment , with the crazy excitement of our first encounter , the yelling and shooting still continuing up at the road , and the thirst of some of the men , which was so great that they waded into the muddy water and scooped up handfuls of it . Isaac Pitt , one of the men from Lincoln , had taken a musket ball in his belly ; ; and though he had found the strength to run with us , now he collapsed and lay on the ground , dying , the Reverend holding his head and wiping his hot brow . It may appear that we were cruel and callous , but no one had time to spend sympathizing with poor Isaac -- except the Reverend . I know that I myself felt that it was a mortal shame for a man to be torn open by a British musket ball , as Isaac had been , yet I also felt relieved and lucky that it had been him and not myself . I was drunk with excitement and the smell of gunpowder that came floating down from the road , and the fact that I was not afraid now , but only waiting to know what to do next . Meanwhile , I reloaded my gun , as the other men were doing . We were less than a quarter of a mile from the road , and we could trace its shape from the ribbon of powder smoke and dust that hung over it . Wherever you looked , you saw Committeemen running across the meadows , some away from the road , some toward it , some parallel to it ; ; and about a mile to the west a cluster of at least fifty Militia were making their way in our direction . Cousin Joshua and some others felt that we should march toward Lexington and take up new positions ahead of the slow-moving British column , but another group maintained that we should stick to this spot and this section of road . I didn't offer any advice , but I certainly did not want to go back to where the officer lay with his brains dashed out . Someone said that while we were standing here and arguing about it , the British would be gone ; ; but Cousin Simmons said he had watched them marching west early in the morning , and moving at a much brisker pace it had still taken half an hour for their column to pass , what with the narrowness of the road and their baggage and ammunition carts . While this was being discussed , we saw the militia to the west of us fanning out and breaking into little clusters of two and three men as they approached the road . It was the opinion of some of us that these must be part of the Committeemen who had been in the Battle of the North Bridge , which entitled them to a sort of veteran status , and we felt that if they employed this tactic , it was likely enough the best one . Mattathias Dover said : `` It makes sense . If we cluster together , the redcoats can make an advantage out of it , but there's not a blessed thing they can do with two or three of us except chase us , and we can outrun them '' . That settled it , and we broke into parties of two and three . Cousin Joshua Dover decided to remain with the Reverend and poor Isaac Pitt until life passed away -- and he was hurt so badly he did not seem for long in this world . I went off with Cousin Simmons , who maintained that if he didn't see to me , he didn't know who would . `` Good heavens , Adam '' , he said , `` I thought one thing you'd have no trouble learning is when to get out of a place '' . `` I learned that now '' , I said . We ran east for about half a mile before we turned back to the road , panting from the effort and soaked with sweat . There was a clump of trees that appeared to provide cover right up to the road , and the shouting and gunfire never slackened . Under the trees , there was a dead redcoat , a young boy with a pasty white skin and a face full of pimples , who had taken a rifle ball directly between the eyes . Three men were around him . They had stripped him of his musket and equipment , and now they were pulling his boots and jacket off . Cousin Simmons grabbed one of them by the shoulder and flung him away . `` God's name , what are you to rob the dead with the fight going on '' ! ! Cousin Simmons roared . They tried to outface him , but Joseph Simmons was as wide as two average men , and it would have taken braver men than these were to outface him . That summer the gambling houses were closed , despite the threats of Pierre Ameaux , a gaming-card manufacturer . Dancing was no longer permitted in the streets . The Bordel and other places of prostitution were emptied . The slit breeches had to go . Drunkenness was no longer tolerated . In defiance , a chinless reprobate , Jake Camaret , marched down the aisle in St. Peter's one Sunday morning , followed by one of the women from the Bordel , whose dress and walk plainly showed the lack of any shame . Plunking themselves down on the front bench , they turned to smirk at those around them . John's first impulse was to denounce their blasphemy . But the thought occurred that God would want this opportunity used to tell them about Him . Calmly he opened the Bible and read of the woman at the well . He finished the worship service as if there had been no brazen attempt to dishonor God and man . The next morning , as the clock struck nine , he appeared at the Council meeting in the Town Hall and insisted that the couple would have to be punished if the Church was to be respected . `` I have told you before , and I tell you again '' , Monsieur Favre said rudely . `` Stick to the preaching of the Gospel '' ! ! John stiffened in anger . `` That is the answer the ungodly will always make when the Church points its fingers at their sins . I say to you that the Church will ever decry evil '' ! ! John's reply was like a declaration of war . Monsieur Favre sat down in his high-backed stall , lips compressed , eyes glinting . Ablard Corne , a short man with a rotunda of stomach , rose . Every eye was on him as he began to speak . `` What Master Calvin says is true . How can we have a good city unless we respect morality '' ? ? Abel Poupin , a tall man with sunken cheeks and deep-set eyes , got to his feet . `` We all know that Jake Camaret and the woman are brazenly living together . It would be well to show the populace how we deal with adulterers '' . Philibert Berthelier , the son of the famous patriot , disagreed . `` Do not listen to that Frenchman . He is throttling the liberty my father gave his life to win '' ! ! John was quietly insistent . `` There can be no compromise when souls are in jeopardy '' . A week later the sentence of the Council was carried out : Jake Camaret and the woman were marched naked through the streets past a mocking populace . Before them stalked the beadle , proclaiming as he went , `` Thus the Council deals with those who break its laws -- adulterers , thieves , murderers , and lewd persons . Let evildoers contemplate their ways , and let every man beware '' ! ! John's thoughts raced painfully into the past as he read the letter he had just received from his sister Mary . Charles had died two weeks before , in early November , without being reconciled to the Church . The canons , in a body , had tried to force him on his deathbed to let them give him the last rites of the Church , but he had died still proclaiming salvation by faith . Burial had taken place at night in the ground at the public crossroads under the gibbet , so that his enemies could not find his body and have it dug up and burned . The Abbot of St. Eloi , Claude De Mommor , had been a good friend , but not even he thought Charles deserved burial in hallowed ground . John closed his eyes and saw once again the little niche in his mother's bedroom , where she had knelt to tell the good Virgin of her needs . The blue-draped Virgin was still there , but no one knelt before her now . Not even Varnessa ; ; she , too , prayed only to God . For an instant John longed for the sound of the bells of Noyon-la-Sainte , the touch of his mother's hand , the lilt of Charles's voice in the square raftered rooms , his father's bass tones rumbling to the canons , and the sight of the beloved bishop . But he had to follow the light . Unless God expected a man to believe the Holy Scriptures , why had He given them to him ? ? The white-clad trees stood like specters in the February night . Snow buried the streets and covered the slanting rooftops , as John trudged toward St. Peter's . A carriage crunched by , its dim lights filtering through the gloom . The sharp wind slapped at him and his feet felt like ice as the snow penetrated the holes of his shoes , his only ones , now patched with folded parchment . The city had recently given him a small salary , but it was not enough to supply even necessities . As he neared the square , a round figure muffled in a long , black cape whisked by . John recognized Ablard Corne and called out a greeting . How grateful he was to such men ! ! There were several on the Council who tried to live like Christians . Despite their efforts , the problems seemed to grow graver all the time . Quickening his steps , John entered the vast church and climbed the tower steps to the bells . Underneath the big one , in the silent moonlight , lay a dead pigeon , and on the smaller bell , the Clemence , two gray and white birds slept huddled together in the cold winter air . John leaned upon the stone balustrade . He brushed back his black hair , shoving it under his pastor's cap to keep it from blowing in his eyes . Below the moon-splashed world rolled away to insurmountable white peaks ; ; above him the deep blue sky glittered with stars . He stood very still , his arms at his sides , staring up at the heavens , then down at the blinking lights below . `` How long , my Lord ? ? How long ? ? I have never asked for an easy task , but I am weary of the strife '' . Sleep was difficult these days . Indigestion plagued him . Severe headaches were frequent . Loneliness tore through him like a physical pain whenever he thought of Peter Robert , Nerien , Nicholas Cop , Martin Bucer , and even the compromising Louis Du Tillet . An occasional traveler from Italy brought news of Peter Robert , who was now distributing his Bible among the Waldensian peasants . Letters came regularly from Nerien , Nicholas , and Martin . He had Anthony and William to confide in and consult . But William continued to find a bitter joy in smashing images and tearing down symbols sacred to the Old Church . John found it difficult , but he held him in check . And Anthony was busy most of the time courting this girl and that . His easy good looks made him a favorite with the ladies . Geneva , instead of becoming the City of God , as John had dreamed , had in the two years since he had been there , continued to be a godless place where all manner of vice flourished . Refugees poured in , signing the Confession and rules in order to remain , and then disregarding them . Dice rolled , prostitutes plied their trade , thieves stole , murderers stabbed , and the ungodly blasphemed . Catholics who were truly Christians longed for the simple penance of days gone by . Libertines recalled the heroism of the past and demanded : `` Are we going to allow the Protestant Pope , Master Calvin , to curtail our liberty ? ? Why , oh why , doesn't he stick to preaching the Gospel , instead of meddling in civic affairs , politics , economics , and social issues that are no concern of the Church '' ? ? And John's reply was always the same : `` Anything that affects souls is the concern of the Church ! ! We will have righteousness '' ! ! Tears burned behind his eyes as he prayed and meditated tonight . Unless the confusion cleared , he would not be coming here much longer . Monsieur Favre's threat would become a reality , for he continued to proclaim loudly that the city must rid itself of `` that Frenchman '' . The slow tapping of a cane on the stone steps coming up to the tower interrupted his reverie . Faint at first , the tapping grew until it sounded loud against the wind . Eli Corault ! ! John thought . What is he doing here at this hour ? ? He started down the steps to meet the near-blind preacher , who had been one of the early Gospelers in Paris . `` John ? ? Is that you ? ? I came to warn you of a plot '' ! ! John stood above him , his face ashen . What now ? ? Slowly , like a man grown old , he took Eli's hand and led him below to the tower study , guiding him to a chair beside the little hearth where a fire still burned . `` Plot '' ? ? John asked tiredly . `` Monsieur Favre just paid me a visit . I went to your rooms , and Anthony told me you were here . Two Anabaptists , Caroli and Benoit , are to challenge you and William to a debate before the Council . It is to be a trap . You know the law : if you lose the debate after accepting a challenge , you will be banished '' ! ! `` What will be the subject '' ? ? `` You are to be accused of Arianism to confuse the religious who remain loyal '' . Anger and fear fused in John . Ever since the fourth century a controversy had raged over the person of Christ . Those who refused to believe that He was the eternal Son of God were termed Arianists . Peter Caroli had come to Geneva , saying that he had been a bishop of the Church of Rome and had been persecuted in Paris for his Reformed faith . He asked to be appointed a preacher . But Michael Sept had unmasked him , revealing he had never been a bishop , but was an Anabaptist , afraid to state his faith , because he knew John Calvin had written a book against their belief that the soul slept after death . So John had refused to agree to his appointment as a preacher , and now Caroli sought revenge . John sighed . `` If William agrees , we should insist on a public debate '' , he said at length . `` There is more to the conspiracy . Bern demands that the Lord's Supper be administered here as it used to be , with unleavened bread . Furthermore , Bern decrees that we must do as we are ordered by the Council , preach only the word of God and stop meddling in politics '' ! ! `` It was always the spirit with Christ ; ; matters such as leavened or unleavened bread are inconsequential . Geneva must remain a sovereign state . We will not yield to the demands of Bern '' ! ! The firelight played over Eli's flowing white locks and rugged features . `` Monsieur Favre indicated that if I would co-operate , after you and William are banished , following the debate , I will be given a place of influence '' . `` What was your reply to that '' ? ? `` That I would rather be banished with two such Christians than be made the Chief Syndic '' ! ! The following morning , as John entered the Place Molard on his way to visit a sick refugee , he had a premonition of danger . Then suddenly a group of men and dogs circled him . He wanted to run , but he knew that if he did , he would be lost . He stood very still , his heart thumping wildly . On the outskirts of the rabble the Camaret brothers and Gaspard Favre shook their fists . `` Are you going to comply with the demands of Bern '' ? ? The chinless Jake called . `` Arianist '' ! ! A rowdy with a big blob of a nose roared . `` Heretic '' ! ! John lifted his hand for silence . `` Know this : the ministers will not yield to the demands of Bern '' . His voice shook a little . Somebody heaved a stone . For an instant John was stunned . When he felt the side of his head , his fingers came away covered with blood . Before he could duck , another stone struck him . And another . `` Let him be now '' ! ! Pierre Ameaux , the gaming-card manufacturer said , his little pig eyes glaring . `` We have taught him a lesson '' . The crowd moved back and John started dizzily down the hill . Fists pummeled him as he staggered forward . Then he slipped and went down on his hands and knees in the melting snow . At once a bevy of dogs was snapping and snarling around him . One , more horrible than the rest , lunged , growling deep in his throat , his hair bristling . With great difficulty John clambered to his feet and started to run , sweat pouring down his face . Standing in the shelter of the tent -- a rejected hospital tent on which the rain now dripped , no longer drumming -- Adam watched his own hands touch the objects on the improvised counter of boards laid across two beer barrels . There was , of course , no real need to rearrange everything . A quarter inch this way or that for the hardbake , or the toffee , or the barley sugar , or the sardines , or the bitters , or the condensed milk , or the stationery , or the needles -- what could it mean ? ? Adam watched his own hands make the caressing , anxious movement that , when rain falls and nobody comes , and ruin draws close like a cat rubbing against the ankles , has been the ritual of stall vendors , forever . He recognized the gesture . He knew its meaning . He had seen a dry , old , yellowing hand reach out , with that painful solicitude , to touch , to rearrange , to shift aimlessly , some object worth a pfennig . Back in Bavaria he had seen that gesture , and at that sight his heart had always died within him . On such occasions he had not had the courage to look at the face above the hand , whatever face it might be . Now the face was his own . He wondered what expression , as he made that gesture , was on his face . He wondered if it wore the old anxiety , or the old , taut stoicism . But there was no need , he remembered , for his hand to reach out , for his face to show concern or stoicism . It was nothing to him if rain fell and nobody came . Then why was he assuming the role -- the gesture and the suffering ? ? What was he expiating ? ? Or was he now taking the role -- the gesture and the suffering -- because it was the only way to affirm his history and identity in the torpid , befogged loneliness of this land . This was Virginia . He looked out of the tent at the company street . The rain dripped on the freezing loblolly of the street . Beyond that misty gray of the rain , he saw the stretching hutment , low diminutive log cabins , chinked with mud , with doorways a man would have to crouch to get through , with roofs of tenting laid over boughs or boards from hardtack boxes , or fence rails , with cranky chimneys of sticks and dried mud . The chimney of the hut across from him was surmounted by a beef barrel with ends knocked out . In this heavy air , however , that device did not seem to help . The smoke from that chimney rose as sluggishly as smoke from any other , and hung as sadly in the drizzle , creeping back down along the sopping canvas of the roof . Over the door was a board with large , inept lettering : home sweet home . This was the hut of Simms Purdew , the hero . The men were huddled in those lairs . Adam knew the names of some . He knew the faces of all , hairy or shaven , old or young , fat or thin , suffering or hardened , sad or gay , good or bad . When they stood about his tent , chaffing each other , exchanging their obscenities , cursing command or weather , he had studied their faces . He had had the need to understand what life lurked behind the mask of flesh , behind the oath , the banter , the sadness . Once covertly looking at Simms Purdew , the only man in the world whom he hated , he had seen the heavy , slack , bestubbled jaw open and close to emit the cruel , obscene banter , and had seen the pale-blue eyes go watery with whisky and merriment , and suddenly he was not seeing the face of that vile creature . He was seeing , somehow , the face of a young boy , the boy Simms Purdew must once have been , a boy with sorrel hair , and blue eyes dancing with gaiety , and the boy mouth grinning trustfully among the freckles . In that moment of vision Adam heard the voice within himself saying : I must not hate him , I must not hate him or I shall die . His heart suddenly opened to joy . He thought that if once , only once , he could talk with Simms Purdew , something about his own life , and all life , would be clear and simple . If Simms Purdew would turn to him and say : `` Adam , you know when I was a boy , it was a funny thing happened . Lemme tell you now '' -- If only Simms Purdew could do that , whatever the thing he remembered and told . It would be a sign for the untellable , and he , Adam , would understand . Now , Adam , in the gray light of afternoon , stared across at the hut opposite his tent , and thought of Simms Purdew lying in there in the gloom , snoring on his bunk , with the fumes of whisky choking the air . He saw the sign above the door of the hut : home sweet home . He saw the figure of a man in a poncho coming up the company street , with an armful of wood . It was Pullen James , the campmate of Simms Purdew . He carried the wood , carried the water , did the cooking , cleaning and mending , and occasionally got a kick in the butt for his pains . Adam watched the moisture flow from the poncho . It gave the rubberized fabric a dull gleam , like metal . Pullen James humbly lowered his head , pushed aside the hardtack-box door of the hut , and was gone from sight . Adam stared at the door and remembered that Simms Purdew had been awarded the Medal of Honor for gallantry at Antietam . The street was again empty . The drizzle was slacking off now , but the light was grayer . With enormous interest , Adam watched his hands as they touched and shifted the objects on the board directly before him . Into the emptiness of the street , and his spirit , moved a form . The form was swathed in an army blanket , much patched , fastened at the neck with a cord . From under the shapeless huddle of blanket the feet moved in the mud . The feet wore army shoes , in obvious disrepair . The head was wrapped in a turban and on top of the turban rode a great hamper across which a piece of poncho had been flung . The gray face stared straight ahead in the drizzle . Moisture ran down the cheeks , gathered at the tip of the nose , and at the chin . The figure was close enough now for him to see the nose twitching to dislodge the drop clinging there . The figure stopped and one hand was perilously freed from the hamper to scratch the nose . Then the figure moved on . This was one of the Irish women who had built their own huts down near the river . They did washing . Adam recognized this one . He recognized her because she was the one who , in a winter twilight , on the edge of camp , had once stopped him and reached down her hand to touch his fly . `` Slice o' mutton , bhoy '' ? ? She had queried in her soft guttural . `` Slice o' mutton '' ? ? Her name was Mollie . They called her Mollie the Mutton , and laughed . Looking down the street after her , Adam saw that she had again stopped and again removed one hand from the basket . He could not make out , but he knew that again she was scratching her nose . Mollie the Mutton was scratching her nose . The words ran crazily in his head : Mollie the Mutton is scratching her nose in the rain . Then the words fell into a pattern : `` Mollie the Mutton is scratching her nose , Scratching her nose in the rain . Mollie the Mutton is scratching her nose in the rain '' . The pattern would not stop . It came again and again . He felt trapped in that pattern , in the repetition . Suddenly he thought he might weep . `` What's the matter with me '' ? ? He demanded out loud . He looked wildly around , at the now empty street , at the mud , at the rain . `` Oh , what's the matter with me '' ? ? He demanded . When he had stored his stock in the great oak chest , locked the two big hasps and secured the additional chain , tied the fly of the tent , and picked up the cash box , he moved up the darkening street . He would consign the cash box into the hands of Jed Hawksworth , then stand by while his employer checked the contents and the list of items sold . Then he -- Then what ? ? He did not know . His mind closed on that prospect , as though fog had descended to blot out a valley . Far off , in the dusk , he heard voices singing , muffled but strong . In one of the huts a group of men were huddled together , singing . He stopped . He strained to hear . He heard the words : `` Rock of Ages , cleft for me , Let me hide myself in Thee ! ! Let the water and the blood From Thy riven side flow ! ! '' He thought : I am a Jew from Bavaria . He was standing there , he thought , in Virginia , in the thickening dusk , in a costly greatcoat that had belonged to another Jew . That other Jew , a young man too , had left that greatcoat behind , in a rich house , and marched away . He had crossed the river which now , beyond the woods yonder , was sliding darkly under the mist . He had plunged into the dark woods beyond . He had died there . What had that man , that other young Jew , felt as he stood in the twilight and heard other men , far away , singing together ? ? Adam thought of the hutments , regiment after regiment , row after row , the thousands of huts , stretching away into the night . He thought of the men , the nameless thousands , huddling in them . He thought of Simms Purdew snoring on his bunk while Pullen James crouched by the hearth , skirmishing an undershirt for lice , and a wet log sizzled . He thought of Simms Purdew , who once had risen at the edge of a cornfield , a maniacal scream on his lips , and swung a clubbed musket like a flail to beat down the swirl of Rebel bayonets about him . He thought of Simms Purdew rising up , fearless in glory . He felt the sweetness of pity flood through him , veining his very flesh . Those men , lying in the huts , they did not know . They did not know who they were or know their own worth . In the pity for them his loneliness was gone . Then he thought of Aaron Blaustein standing in his rich house saying : `` God is tired of taking the blame . He is going to let History take the blame for a while '' . He thought of the old man laughing under the glitter of the great chandelier . He thought : Only in my heart can I make the world hang together . Adam rose from the crouch necessary to enter the hut . He saw Mose squatting by the hearth , breaking up hardtack into a pan . A pot was boiling on the coals . `` Gonna give Ole Buckra all his money '' ? ? Mose asked softly . Adam nodded . `` Yeah '' , Mose murmured , `` yeah . And look what he done give us '' . Adam looked at the pot . `` What is it '' ? ? He asked . `` Chicken '' , Mose said , and theatrically licked his lips . `` Gre't big fat chicken , yeah '' . He licked his lips again . Then : `` yeah . A chicken with six tits and a tail lak a corkscrew . And it squealed for slop '' . Mose giggled . `` Fooled you , huh ? ? It is the same ole same , tell me its name . It is sowbelly with tits on . It is salt po'k . It is salt po'k and skippers . That po'k , it was so full of skippers it would jump and run and not come when you say , hoo-pig . Had to put my foot on it to hole it down while I cut it up fer the lob-scuse '' . He dumped the pan of crumbled hardtack into the boiling pot of lobscouse . `` Good ole lob-scuse '' , he mumbled , and stirred the pot . He stopped stirring and looked over his shoulder . `` Know what Ole Buckra et tonight '' ? ? He demanded . `` Know what I had to fix fer Ole Him '' ? ? Adam shook his head . `` Chicken '' , Mose said . She was a child too much a part of her environment , too eager to grow and learn and experience . Once , they were at Easthampton for the summer ( again , Fritzie said , a good place , even though they were being robbed ) . One soft evening -- that marvelous sea-blessed time when the sun's departing warmth lingers and a smell of spume and wrack haunts everything -- Amy had picked herself off the floor and begun to walk . Fritzie was on the couch reading ; ; Laura was sitting in an easy chair about eight feet away . The infant , in white terry-cloth bathrobe , her face intense and purposeful , had essayed a few wobbly steps toward her father . `` Y'all wanna walk -- walk '' , he said . Then , gently , he shoved her behind toward Laura . Amy walked -- making it halfway across the cottage floor . She lost not a second , picking herself up and continuing her pilgrimage to Laura . Then Laura took her gently and shoved her off again , toward Fritzie : Amy did not laugh -- this was work , concentration , achievement . In a few minutes she was making the ten-foot hike unaided ; ; soon she was parading around the house , flaunting her new skill . Some liar's logic , a wisp of optimism as fragile as the scent of tropical blossoms that came through the window ( a euphoria perhaps engendered by the pill Fritzie had given her ) , consoled her for a moment . Amy had to be safe , had to come back to them -- if only to reap that share of life's experiences that were her due , if only to give her parents another chance to do better by her . Through the swathings of terror , she jabbed deceit's sharp point -- Amy would be reborn , a new child , with new parents , living under new circumstances . The comfort was short-lived , yet she found herself returning to the assurance whenever her imagination forced images on her too awful to contemplate without the prop of illusion . Gazing at her husband's drugged body , his chest rising and falling in mindless rhythms , she saw the grandeur of his fictional world , that lush garden from which he plucked flowers and herbs . She envied him . She admired him . In the darkness , she saw him stirring . He seemed to be muttering , his voice surprisingly clear . `` Y'all should have let me take that money out '' , Andrus said . `` 'nother minute I'd have been fine . H'all should have let me do it '' . Laura touched his hand . `` Yes , I know , Fritzie . I should have '' . Tuesday The heat intensified on Tuesday . Southern California gasped and blinked under an autumn hot spell , drier , more enervating , more laden with man's contrived impurities than the worst days of the summer past . It could continue this way , hitting 106 and more in the Valley , Joe McFeeley knew , into October . He and Irvin Moll were sipping coffee at the breakfast bar . Both had been up since 7:00 -- Irv on the early-morning watch , McFeeley unable to sleep during his four-hour relief . The night before , they had telephoned the Andrus maid , Selena Masters , and she had arrived early , bursting her vigorous presence into the silent house with an assurance that amused McFeeley and confounded Moll . The latter , thanking her for the coffee , had winked and muttered , `` Sure 'nuff , honey '' . Selena was the wrong woman for these crudities . With a hard eye , she informed Moll : `` Don't sure 'nuff me , officer . I'm honey only to my husband , understand '' ? ? Sergeant Moll understood . The maid was very black and very energetic , trim in a yellow pique uniform . Her speech was barren of southernisms ; ; she was one of Eliot Sparling's neutralized minorities , adopting the rolling R's and constricted vowels of Los Angeles . Not seeing her dark intelligent face , one would have gauged the voice as that of a Westwood Village matron , ten years out of Iowa . After she had served the detectives coffee and toast ( they politely declined eggs , uncomfortable about their tenancy ) , she settled down with a morning newspaper and began reading the stock market quotations . While she was thus engaged , McFeeley questioned her about her whereabouts the previous day , any recollections she had of people hanging around , of overcurious delivery boys or repairmen , of strange cars cruising the neighborhood . She answered him precisely , missing not a beat in her scrutiny of the financial reports . Selena Masters , Joe realized , was her own woman . She was the only kind of Negro Laura Andrus would want around : independent , unservile , probably charging double what ordinary maids did for housework -- and doubly efficient . When the parents emerged from the bedroom a few minutes later , the maid greeted them quietly . `` I'm awful sorry about what's happened '' , Selena said . `` Maybe today'll be a good-news day '' . She charged off to the bedrooms . Moll took his coffee into the nursery . During the night , a phone company technician had deadened the bells and installed red blinkers on the phones . Someone would have to remain in the office continually . McFeeley greeted the parents , then studied his notebook . He wanted to take the mother to headquarters at once and start her on the mug file . `` Sleep well '' ? ? He asked . Andrus did not answer him . His face was bloated with drugging , redder than normal . The woman had the glassy look of an invalid , as if she had not slept at all . `` Oh -- we managed '' , she said . `` I'm a little groggy . Did anything happen during the night '' ? ? `` Few crank calls '' , McFeeley said . `` A couple of tips we're running down -- nothing promising . We can expect more of the same . Too bad your number is in the directory '' . `` Didn't occur to me my child would be kidnaped when I had it listed '' , Andrus muttered . He settled on the sofa with his coffee , warming his hands on the cup , although the room was heavy with heat . The three had little to say to each other . The previous night's horror -- the absolute failure , overcast with the intrusions of the press , had left them all with a wan sense of uselessness , of play-acting . Sipping their coffee , discussing the weather , the day's shopping , Fritzie's commitments at the network ( all of which he would cancel ) , they avoided the radio , the morning TV news show , even the front page of the Santa Luisa Register , resting on the kitchen bar . Kidnaper spurns ransom ; ; Amy still missing . Once , Andrus walked by it , hastily scanned the bold black headline and the five-column lead of the article ( by Duane Bosch , staff correspondent -- age not given ) , and muttered : `` We a buncha national celebrities '' . McFeeley told the parents he would escort them to police headquarters in a half hour . Before that , he wanted to talk to the neighbors . He did not want to bring the Andruses to the station house too early -- Rheinholdt had summoned a press conference , and he didn't want them subjected to the reporters again . He could think of nothing else to tell them : no assurances , no hopeful hints at great discoveries that day . When the detective left , Andrus phoned his secretary to cancel his work and to advise the network to get a substitute director for his current project . Mrs. Andrus was talking to the maid , arranging for her to come in every day , instead of the four days she now worked . Outside , only a handful of reporters remained . The bulk of the press corps was covering Rheinholdt's conference . In contrast to the caravan of the previous night , there were only four cars parked across the street . Two men he did not recognize were sipping coffee and munching sweet rolls . He did not see Sparling , or DeGroot , or Ringel , or any of the feverish crew that had so harassed him twelve hours ago . However , the litter remained , augmented by several dozen lunchroom suppers . The street cleaner had not yet been around . One of the reporters called to him : `` Anything new , Lieutenant '' ? ? And he ignored him , skirting the parked cars and walking up the path to the Skopas house . When McFeeley was halfway to the door , the proprietor emerged -- a mountainous , dark man , his head thick with resiny black hair , his eyes like two of the black olives he imported in boatloads . McFeeley identified himself . The master of the house , his nourished face unrevealing , consented to postpone his departure a few minutes to talk to the detective . Inside , as soon as Mr. Skopas had disclosed -- in a hoarse whisper -- the detective's errand , his family gathered in a huddle , forming a mass of dark flesh on and around a brocaded sofa which stood at one side of a baroque fireplace . Flanked by marble urns and alabaster lamps , they seemed to be posing for a tribal portrait . It was amazing how they had herded together for protection : an enormous matriarch in a quilted silk wrapper , rising from the breakfast table ; ; a gross boy in his teens , shuffling in from the kitchen with a sandwich in his hands ; ; a girl in her twenties , fat and sullen , descending the marble staircase ; ; then all four gathering on the sofa to face the inquisitor . They answered him in monosyllables , nods , occasionally muttering in Greek to one another , awaiting the word from Papa , who restlessly cracked his knuckles , anxious to stuff himself into his white Cadillac and burst off to the freeway . No , they hadn't seen anyone around ; ; no , they didn't know the Andrus family ; ; yes , they had read about the case ; ; yes , they had let some reporters use their phone , but they would no longer . They offered no opinions , volunteered nothing , betrayed no emotions . Studying them , McFeeley could not help make comparison with the Andrus couple . The Skopas people seemed to him of that breed of human beings whose insularity frees them from tragedy . He imagined they were the kind whose tax returns were never examined ( if they were , they were never penalized ) , whose children had no unhappy romances , whose names never knew scandal . The equation was simple : wealth brought them happiness , and their united front to the world was their warning that they meant to keep everything they had , let no one in on the secrets . By comparison , Fritzie and Laura Andrus were quivering fledglings . They possessed no outer fortifications , no hard shells of confidence ; ; they had enough difficulty getting from day to day , let alone having an awful crime thrust upon them . Skopas expressed no curiosity over the case , offered no expression of sympathy , made no move to escort McFeely to the door . All four remained impacted on the sofa until he had left . He had spoken to Mrs. . Emerson the previous day . There remained a family named Kahler , owners of a two-story Tudor-style house on the south side of the Andrus home . Their names had not come up in any discussions with Laura , and he had no idea what they would be like . McFeeley noted the immaculate lawn and gardens : each blade of grass cropped , bright and firm ; ; each shrub glazed with good health . The door was answered by a slender man in his sixties -- straight-backed , somewhat clerical in manner , wearing rimless glasses . When Joe identified himself , he nodded , unsmiling , and ushered him into a sedate living room . Mrs. Kahler joined them . She had a dried-out quality -- a gray , lean woman , not unattractive . Both were dressed rather formally . The man wore a vest and a tie , the woman had on a dark green dress and three strands of pearls . `` Funny thing '' , Mr. Kahler said , when they were seated , `` when I heard you ringing , I figured it was that guy down the block , Hausman '' . McFeeley looked puzzled . Kahler continued : `` I fixed his dog the other day and I guess he's sore , so I expected him to come barging in '' . Mr. Kahler went on to explain how Hausman's fox terrier had been `` making '' in his flower beds . The dog refused to be scared off , so Kahler had purchased some small firecrackers . He would lay in wait in the garage , and when the terrier came scratching around , he'd let fly with a cherry bomb . `` Scared the hell out of him '' , Kahler grinned . `` I hit him in the ass once '' . Both grinned at the detective . `` Finally , all I needed was to throw a little piece of red wood that looked like a firecracker and that dumb dog would run ki-yi-ing for his life '' . In the dim underwater light they dressed and straightened up the room , and then they went across the hall to the kitchen . She was intimidated by the stove . He found the pilot light and turned on one of the burners for her . The gas flamed up two inches high . They found the teakettle . And put water on to boil and then searched through the icebox . Several sections of a loaf of dark bread ; ; butter ; ; jam ; ; a tiny cake of ice . In their search for what turned out to be the right breakfast china but the wrong table silver , they opened every cupboard door in the kitchen and pantry . While she was settling the teacart , he went back across the hall to their bedroom , opened one of the suitcases , and took out powdered coffee and sugar . She appeared with the teacart and he opened the windows . `` Do you want to call Eugene '' ? ? He didn't , but it was not really a question , and so he left the room , walked down the hall to the front of the apartment , hesitated , and then knocked lightly on the closed door of the study . A sleepy voice answered . `` Le petit dejeuner '' , Harold said , in an accent that did credit to Miss Sloan , his high-school French teacher . At the same time , his voice betrayed uncertainty about their being here , and conveyed an appeal to whatever is reasonable , peace-loving , and dependable in everybody . Since ordinary breakfast-table conversation was impossible , it was at least something that they were able to offer Eugene the sugar bowl with their sugar in it , and the plate of bread and butter , and that Eugene could return the pitcher of hot milk to them handle first . Eugene put a spoonful of powdered coffee into his cup and then filled it with hot water . Stirring , he said : `` I am sorry that my work prevents me from doing anything with you today '' . They assured him that they did not expect or need to be entertained . Harold put a teaspoonful of powdered coffee in his cup and filled it with hot water , and then , stirring , he sat back in his chair . The chair creaked . Every time he moved or said something , the chair creaked again . Eugene was not entirely silent , or openly rude -- unless asking Harold to move to another chair and placing himself in the fauteuil that creaked so alarmingly was an act of rudeness . It went right on creaking under his own considerable weight , and all it needed , Harold thought , was for somebody to fling himself back in a fit of laughter and that would be the end of it . Through the open window they heard sounds below in the street : cartwheels , a tired horse's plodding step , voices . Harold indicated the photograph on the wall and asked what church the stone sculpture was in . Eugene told him and he promptly forgot . They passed the marmalade , the bread , the black-market butter , back and forth . Nothing was said about hotels or train journeys . Eugene offered Harold his car , to use at any time he cared to , and when this offer was not accepted , the armchair creaked . They all three had another cup of coffee . Eugene was in his pajamas and dressing gown , and on his large feet he wore yellow Turkish slippers that turned up at the toes . `` Excuse me '' , he said in Berlitz English , and got up and left them , to bathe and dress . The first shrill ring of the telephone brought Harold out into the hall . He realized that he had no idea where the telephone was . At that moment the bathroom door flew open and Eugene came out , with his face lathered for shaving , and strode down the hall , tying the sash of his dressing gown as he went . The telephone was in the study but the ringing came from the hall . Between the telephone and the wall plug there was sixty feet of cord , and when the conversation came to an end , Eugene carried the instrument with him the whole length of the apartment , to his bathroom , where it rang three more times while he was shaving and in the tub . Before he left the apartment he knocked on their door and asked if there was anything he could do for them . Harold shook his head . `` Sabine called a few minutes ago '' , Eugene said . `` She wants you and Barbara to have dinner with her tomorrow night '' . He handed Harold a key to the front door , and cautioned him against leaving it unlocked while they were out of the apartment . When enough time had elapsed so that there was little likelihood of his returning for something he had forgotten , Harold went out into the hall and stood looking into one room after another . In the room next to theirs was a huge cradle , of mahogany , ornately carved and decorated with gold leaf . It was the most important-looking cradle he had ever seen . Then came their bathroom , and then a bedroom that , judging by the photographs on the walls , must belong to Mme Cestre . A young woman who looked like Alix , with her two children . Alix and Eugene on their wedding day . Matching photographs in oval frames of Mme Bonenfant and an elderly man who must be Alix's grandfather . Mme Vienot , considerably younger and very different . The schoolboy . And a gray-haired man whose glance -- direct , lifelike , and mildly accusing -- was contradicted by the gilt and black frame . It was the kind of frame that is only put around the photograph of a dead person . Professor Cestre , could it be ? ? With the metal shutters closed , the dining room was so dark that it seemed still night in there . One of the drawing-room shutters was partly open and he made out the shapes of chairs and sofas , which seemed to be upholstered in brown or russet velvet . The curtains were of the same material , and there were some big oil paintings -- portraits in the style of Lancret and Boucher . Though , taken individually , the big rooms were , or seemed to be , square , the apartment as a whole formed a triangle . The apex , the study where Eugene slept , was light and bright and airy and cheerful . The window looked out on the Place Redoute -- it was the only window of the apartment that did . Looking around slowly , he saw a marble fireplace , a desk , a low bookcase of mahogany with criss-crossed brass wire instead of glass panes in the doors . The daybed Eugene had slept in , made up now with its dark-brown velours cover and pillows . The portable record player with a pile of classical records beside it . Beethoven's Fifth was the one on top . Da-da-da-dum Music could not be Eugene's passion . Besides , the records were dusty . He tried the doors of the bookcase . Locked . The titles he could read easily through the criss-crossed wires : works on theology , astral physics , history , biology , political science . No poetry . No novels . He moved over to the desk and stood looking at the papers on it but not touching anything . The clock on the mantel piece was scandalized and ticked so loudly that he glanced at it over his shoulder and then quickly left the room . The concierge called out to them as they were passing through the foyer . Her quarters were on the right as you walked into the building , and her small front room was clogged with heavy furniture -- a big , round , oak dining table and chairs , a buffet , with a row of unclaimed letters inserted between the mirror and its frame . The suitcases had come while they were out , and had been put in their room , the concierge said . He waited until they were inside the elevator and then said : `` Now what do we do '' ? ? `` Call the Vouillemont , I guess '' . `` I guess '' . Rather than sit around waiting for the suitcases to be delivered , they had gone sight-seeing . They went to the Flea Market , expecting to find the treasures of Europe , and found instead a duplication of that long double row of booths in Tours . Cheap clothing and junk of every sort , as far as the eye could see . They looked , even so . Looked at everything . Barbara bought some cotton aprons , and Harold bought shoestrings . They had lunch at a sidewalk cafe overlooking the intersection of two broad , busy , unpicturesque streets , and coming home they got lost in the Metro ; ; it took them over an hour to get back to the station where they should have changed , in order to take the line that went to the Place Redoute . It was the end of the afternoon when he took the huge key out of his pocket and inserted it into the keyhole . When he opened the door , there stood Eugene , on his way out of the apartment . He was wearing sneakers and shorts and an open-collared shirt , and in his hand he carried a little black bag . He did not explain where he was going , and they did not ask . Instead , they went on down the hall to their room . `` Do you think he could be having an affair '' ? ? Barbara asked , as they heard the front door close . `` Oh no '' , Harold said , shocked . `` Well , this is France , after all '' . `` I know , but there must be some other explanation . He's probably spending the evening with friends '' . `` And for that he needs a little bag '' ? ? They went shopping in the neighborhood , and bought two loaves of bread with the ration coupons they had been given in Blois , and some cheese , and a dozen eggs , and a bag of oranges from a peddler in the Place Redoute -- the first oranges they had seen since they landed . They had Vermouth , sitting in front of a cafe . When they got home Harold was grateful for the stillness in the apartment , and thought how , under different circumstances , they might have stayed on here , in these old-fashioned , high-ceilinged rooms that reminded him of the Irelands' apartment in the East Eighties . They could have been perfectly happy here for ten whole days . He went down the hall to Eugene's bathroom , to turn on the hot-water heater , and on the side of the tub he saw a pair of blue wool swimming trunks . He felt them . They were damp . He reached out and felt the bath towel hanging on the towel rack over the tub . Damp also . He looked around the room and then called out : `` Come here , quick '' ? ? `` What is it '' ? ? Barbara asked , standing in the doorway . `` I've solved the mystery of the little bag . There it is and there is what was in it . But where do people go swimming in Paris ? ? That boat in the river , maybe '' . `` What boat '' ? ? `` There's a big boat anchored near the Place De La Concorde , with a swimming pool in it -- didn't you notice it ? ? But if he has time to go swimming , he had time to be with us '' . She looked at him in surprise . `` I know '' , he said , reading her mind . `` I don't know what I'm going to do with you '' . `` It's because we are in France '' , he said , `` and know so few people . So something like this matters more than it would at home . Also , he was so nice when he was nice '' . `` All because I didn't feel like dancing '' . `` I don't think it was that , really '' . `` Then what was it '' ? ? `` I don't know . I wish I did . The tweed coat , maybe . The thing about Eugene is that he's very proud '' . And the thing about hurt feelings , the wet bathing suit pointed out , is that the person who has them is not quite the innocent party he believes himself to be . For instance -- what about all those people Harold Rhodes went toward unhesitatingly , as if this were the one moment they would ever have together , their one chance of knowing each other ? ? Fortunately , the embarrassing questions raised by objects do not need to be answered , or we would all have to go sleep in the open fields . And in any case , answers may clarify but they do not change anything . He brought with him a mixture of myrrh and aloes , of about a hundred pounds' weight . They took Jesus's body , then , and wrapped it in winding-clothes with the spices ; ; that is how the Jews prepare a body for burial . Listed as present at the Descent were Mary , Mary's sister , Mary Magdalene , John , Joseph of Arimathea , Nicodemus . Search as he might , he could find no place where the Bible spoke of a moment when Mary could have been alone with Jesus . Mostly the scene was crowded with mourners , such as the dramatic Dell'Arca Lamentation in Bologna , where the grief-stricken spectators had usurped Mary's last poignant moment . In his concept there could be no one else present . His first desire was to create a mother and son alone in the universe . When might Mary have had that moment to hold her child on her lap ? ? Perhaps after the soldiers had laid him on the ground , while Joseph of Arimathea was at Pontius Pilate's asking for Christ's body , Nicodemus was gathering his mixture of myrrh and aloes , and the others had gone home to mourn . Those who saw his finished Pieta would take the place of the biblical witnesses . They would feel what Mary was undergoing . There would be no halos , no angels . These would be two human beings , whom God had chosen . He felt close to Mary , having spent so long concentrating on the beginning of her journey . Now she was intensely alive , anguished ; ; her son was dead . Even though he would later be resurrected , he was at this moment dead indeed , the expression on his face reflecting what he had gone through on the cross . In his sculpture therefore it would not be possible for him to project anything of what Jesus felt for his mother ; ; only what Mary felt for her son . Jesus' inert body would be passive , his eyes closed . Mary would have to carry the human communication . This seemed right to him . It was a relief to shift in his mind to technical problems . Since his Christ was to be life size , how was Mary to hold him on her lap without the relationship seeming ungainly ? ? His Mary would be slender of limb and delicate of proportion , yet she must hold this full-grown man as securely and convincingly as she would a child . There was only one way to accomplish this : by design , by drawing diagrams and sketches in which he probed the remotest corner of his mind for creative ideas to carry his concept . He started by making free sketches to loosen up his thinking so that images would appear on paper . Visually , these approximated what he was feeling within himself . At the same time he started walking the streets , peering at the people passing or shopping at the stalls , storing up fresh impressions of what they looked like , how they moved . In particular he sought the gentle , sweet-faced nuns , with head coverings and veils coming to the middle of their foreheads , remembering their expressions until he reached home and set them down on paper . Discovering that draperies could be designed to serve structural purposes , he began a study of the anatomy of folds . He improvised as he went along , completing a life-size clay figure , then bought yards of an inexpensive material from a draper , wet the lightweight cloth in a basin and covered it over with clay that Argiento brought from the bank of the Tiber , to the consistency of thick mud . No fold could be accidental , each turn of the drapery had to serve organically , to cover the Madonna's slender legs and feet so that they would give substantive support to Christ's body , to intensify her inner turmoil . When the cloth dried and stiffened , he saw what adjustments had to be made . `` So that's sculpture '' , commented Argiento wryly , when he had sluiced down the floor for a week , `` making mud pies '' . Michelangelo grinned . `` See , Argiento , if you control the way these folds are bunched , like this , or made to flow , you can enrich the body attitudes . They can have as much tactile appeal as flesh and bone '' . He went into the Jewish quarter , wanting to draw Hebraic faces so that he could reach a visual understanding of how Christ might have looked . The Jewish section was in Trastevere , near the Tiber at the church of San Francesco a Ripa . The colony had been small until the Spanish Inquisition of 1492 drove many Jews into Rome . Here , for the most part , they were well treated , as a `` reminder of the Old Testament heritage of Christianity '' ; ; many of their gifted members were prominent in the Vatican as physicians , musicians , bankers . The men did not object to his sketching them while they went about their work , but no one could be persuaded to come to his studio to pose . He was told to ask for Rabbi Melzi at the synagogue on Saturday afternoon . Michelangelo found the rabbi in the room of study , a gentle old man with a white beard and luminous grey eyes , robed in black gabardine with a skullcap on his head . He was reading from the Talmud with a group of men from his congregation . When Michelangelo explained why he had come , Rabbi Melzi replied gravely : `` The Bible forbids us to bow down to or to make graven images . That is why our creative people give their time to literature , not to painting or sculpture '' . `` But , Rabbi Melzi , you don't object to others creating works of art '' ? ? `` Not at all . Each religion has its own tenets '' . `` I am carving a Pieta from white Carrara marble . I wish to make Jesus an authentic Jew . I cannot accomplish this if you will not help me '' . The rabbi said thoughtfully , `` I would not want my people to get in trouble with the Church '' . `` I am working for the Cardinal of San Dionigi . I'm sure he would approve '' . `` What kind of models would you prefer '' ? ? `` Workmen . In their mid-thirties . Not bulky laborers , but sinewy men . With intelligence . And sensitivity '' . Rabbi Melzi smiled at him with infinitely old but merry eyes . `` Leave me your address . I will send you the best the quarter has to offer '' . Michelangelo hurried to Sangallo's solitary bachelor room with his sketches , asked the architect to design a stand which would simulate the seated Madonna . Sangallo studied the drawings and improvised a trestle couch . Michelangelo bought some scrap lumber . Together he and Argiento built the stand , covering it with blankets . His first model arrived at dusk . He hesitated for a moment when Michelangelo asked him to disrobe , so Michelangelo gave him a piece of toweling to wrap around his loins , led him to the kitchen to take off his clothes . He then draped him over the rough stand , explained that he was supposed to be recently dead , and was being held on his mother's lap . The model quite plainly thought Michelangelo crazy ; ; only the instructions from his rabbi kept him from bolting . But at the end of the sitting , when Michelangelo showed him the quick , free drawings , with the mother roughed in , holding her son , the model grasped what Michelangelo was after , and promised to speak to his friends . He worked for two hours a day with each model sent by the rabbi . Mary presented quite a different problem . Though this sculpture must take place thirty-three years after her moment of decision , he could not conceive of her as a woman in her mid-fifties , old , wrinkled , broken in body and face by labor or worry . His image of the Virgin had always been that of a young woman , even as had his memory of his mother . Jacopo Galli introduced him into several Roman homes . Here he sketched , sitting in their flowing gowns of linen and silk , young girls not yet twenty , some about to be married , some married a year or two . Since the Santo Spirito hospital had taken only men , he had had no experience in the study of female anatomy ; ; but he had sketched the women of Tuscany in their fields and homes . He was able to discern the body lines of the Roman women under their robes . He spent concentrated weeks putting his two figures together : a Mary who would be young and sensitive , yet strong enough to hold her son on her lap ; ; and a Jesus who , though lean , was strong even in death a look he remembered well from his experience in the dead room of Santo Spirito . He drew toward the composite design from his meticulously accurate memory , without need to consult his sketches . Soon he was ready to go into a three-dimensional figure in clay . Here he would have free expression because the material could be moved to distort forms . When he wanted to emphasize , or get greater intensity , he added or subtracted clay . Next he turned to wax because there was a similarity of wax to marble in tactile quality and translucence . He respected each of these approach techniques , and kept them in character : his quill drawings had a scratchiness , suggesting skin texture ; ; the clay he used plastically to suggest soft moving flesh , as in an abdomen , in a reclining torso ; ; the wax he smoothed over to give the body surface an elastic pull . Yet he never allowed these models to become fixed in his mind ; ; they remained rough starting points . When carving he was charged with spontaneous energy ; ; too careful or detailed studies in clay and wax would have glued him down to a mere enlarging of his model . The true surge had to be inside the marble itself . Drawing and models were his thinking . Carving was action . 10 . The arrangement with Argiento was working well , except that sometimes Michelangelo could not figure who was master and who apprentice . Argiento had been trained so rigorously by the Jesuits that Michelangelo was unable to change his habits : up before dawn to scrub the floors , whether they were dirty or not ; ; water boiling on the fire for washing laundry every day , the pots scoured with river sand after each meal . `` Argiento , this is senseless '' , he complained , not liking to work on the wet floors , particularly in cold weather . `` You're too clean . Scrub the studio once a week . That's enough '' . `` No '' , said Argiento stolidly . `` Every day . Before dawn . I was taught '' . `` And God help anyone who tries to unteach you '' ! ! Grumbled Michelangelo ; ; yet he knew that he had nothing to grumble about , for Argiento made few demands on him . The boy was becoming acquainted with the contadini families that brought produce into Rome . On Sundays he would walk miles into the campagna to visit with them , and in particular to see their horses . The one thing he missed from his farm in the Po Valley was the animals ; ; frequently he would take his leave of Michelangelo by announcing : `` Today I go see the horses '' . It took a piece of bad luck to show Michelangelo that the boy was devoted to him . He was crouched over his anvil in the courtyard getting his chisels into trim , when a splinter of steel flew into his eye and imbedded itself in his pupil . He stumbled into the house , eyes burning like fire . Argiento made him lie down on the bed , brought a pan of hot water , dipped some clean white linen cloth and applied it to extract the splinter . Though the pain was considerable Michelangelo was not too concerned . He assumed he could blink the splinter out . But it would not come . Argiento never left his side , keeping the water boiled , applying hot compresses throughout the night . By the second day Michelangelo began to worry ; ; and by the second night he was in a state of panic : he could see nothing out of the afflicted eye . At dawn Argiento went to Jacopo Galli . Galli arrived with his family surgeon , Maestro Lippi . The surgeon carried a cage of live pigeons . He told Argiento to take a bird out of the cage , cut a large vein under its wing , let the blood gush into Michelangelo's injured eye . The surgeon came back at dusk , cut the vein of a second pigeon , again washed out the eye . Beth was very still and her breath came in small jerking gasps . The thin legs twitched convulsively once , then Kate felt the little body stiffening in her arms and heard one strangled sound . The scant flesh grew cool beneath her frantic hands . The child was gone . When Juanita awoke , Kate was still rocking the dead child , still crooning in disbelief , `` No , no , oh , no ! ! '' They put Kate to bed and wired Jonathan and sent for the young Presbyterian minister . He sat beside Kate's bed with the others throughout the morning , talking , talking of God's will , while Kate lay staring angrily at him . When he told her God had called the child to Him , she rejected his words rebelliously . Few of the neighbors came , but Mrs. Tussle came , called by tragedy . `` It always comes in threes '' , she sighed heavily . `` Trouble never comes but in threes '' . They held the funeral the next morning from the crossroads church and buried the little box in the quiet family plot . Kate moved through all the preparations and services in a state of bewilderment . She would not accept the death of such a little child . `` God called her to Him '' , the minister had said . God would not do that , Kate thought stubbornly . Jonathan's letter came , as she knew it would , and he had accepted their child's death as another judgment from God against both Kate and himself . In blind panic of grief she accepted Jonathan's dictum , and believed in her desperation that she had been cursed by God . She held Jonathan's letter , his words burning like a brand , and knew suddenly that the bonds between them were severed . She had nothing left but her duty to his land and his son . Joel came and sat mutely with her , sharing her pain and anguish , averting his eyes from the ice packs on her bosom . Juanita and Mrs. Tussle kept Kate in bed a week until her milk dried . When she returned to life in the big house she felt shriveled of all emotion save dedication to duty . She disciplined herself daily to do what must be done . She had even steeled herself to keep Juanita upstairs in the nurse's room off the empty nursery , although the girl tried to insist on moving back to the quarters to spare Kate remembrance of the baby's death . Juanita drooped about the place , wearing a haunted , brooding look , which Kate attributed to the baby's death , until the day a letter came for her addressed to `` Miss Juanita Fitzroy '' , bearing a Grafton postmark . Seeing the slanting hand , Kate knew uneasily that it was from the Yankee colonel . The Federal forces had taken Parkersburg and Grafton from the Rebels and were moving to take all the mountains . Kate tried to contain her curiosity and foreboding at what the letter portended , at what involvement existed for Juanita . Uncle Randolph and Joel had replanted the bottom lands with difficulty , for more of the slaves , including Annie , had sneaked off when the soldiers broke camp . Joel worked like a field hand in the afternoons after school . He had been at lessons in the schoolhouse since they returned from Harpers Ferry . Kate felt she had deserted the boy in her own loss . She loved him and missed his company . Uncle Randolph had been riding out every evening on some secret business of his own . What it was Kate could not fathom . He claimed to be visiting the waterfront saloon at the crossroads to play cards and drink with his cronies , but Kate had not smelled brandy on him since Mrs. Lattimer's funeral . Joel knew what he was about , however . `` You're gonna get caught '' , she heard Joel say to Uncle Randolph by the pump one morning . `` Not this old fox '' , chuckled Uncle Randolph . `` Everybody knows I'm just a harmless , deaf old man who takes to drink . I aim to keep a little whisky still back in the ridge for my pleasure '' . `` Whiskey still , my foot '' , said Joel . `` You're back there riding with the guerrillas , the Moccasin Rangers '' . `` Hush '' , said Uncle Randolph , smiling , `` or I'll give you another black eye '' . He patted the eye Joel had had blackened in a fight over being Rebel at the crossroads some days back . Kate had no idea what they were talking of , although she had seen the blue lights and strange fires burning and winking on the ridges at night , had heard horsemen on the River Road and hill trails through the nights till dawn . Stranger , Uncle Randolph began riding home nights with a jug strapped to his saddle , drunkenly singing `` Old Dan Tucker '' at the top of his voice . Hearing his voice ring raucously up from the road , Kate would await him anxiously and watch perplexed as he walked into the house , cold sober . What he was about became clear to her with the circulation of another broadside proclamation by General McClellan , threatening reprisals against Rebel guerrillas . She was taken up in worry for the reckless old man . Kate drew more and more on her affection for Joel through the hot days of summer work . She had taken him out of the schoolhouse and closed the school for the summer , after she saw Miss Snow crack Joel across the face with a ruler for letting a snake loose in the schoolroom . Kate had walked past the school on her morning chores and had seen the whole incident , had seen Joel's burning humiliation before Miss Snow's cold , bespectacled wrath . He had the hardest pains of growing before him now , as he approached twelve . These would be his hardest years , she knew , and he missed his father desperately . She tried to find some way to draw him out , to help him . Whenever she found time , she went blackberry picking with him , and they would come home together , mouths purple , arms and faces scratched , tired enough to forget grief for another day . He tended the new colts Beau had sired . He helped Kate and Juanita enlarge the flower garden in the side yard , where they sometimes sat in the still evenings watching the last fat bees working against the summer's purple dusk . No one went much to the crossroads now except Uncle Randolph . They stayed in their own world on the bluff , waiting for letters and the peddler , bringing the news . Jonathan wrote grimly of the destruction of Harpers Ferry before they abandoned it ; ; of their first engagement at Falling Waters after Old Jack's First Brigade had destroyed all the rolling stock of the B & O Railroad . The men were restive , he wrote , ready to take the battle to the enemy as Jackson wished . The peddler came bawling his wares and told them of the convention in Wheeling , Which had formed a new state government by declaring the government at Richmond in the east illegal because they were traitors . Dangling his gaudy trinkets before them , he told of the Rebel losses in the mountains , at Cheat and Rich mountains both , and the Federal march on Beverly . `` Cleaned all them Rebs out'n the hills , they did ! ! They won't never git over inter loyal western Virginia , them traitors ! ! The Federals is making everybody take the oath of loyalty around these parts too '' , he crowed . After he had gone , Kate asked Uncle Randolph proudly , `` Would you take their oath '' ? ? And the old man had given a sly and wicked laugh and said , `` Hell , yes ! ! I think I've taken it about fifty times already '' ! ! Winking at Joel's look of shock . Her mother wrote Kate of her grief at the death of Kate's baby and at Jonathan's decision to go with the South `` And , dear Kate '' , she wrote , `` poor Dr. Breckenridge's son Robert is now organizing a militia company to go South , to his good father's sorrow . Maj. Anderson of Fort Sumter is home and recruiting volunteers for the U.S. Army . In spite of the fact that the state legislature voted us neutral , John Hunt Morgan is openly flying the Confederate flag over his woolen factory '' ! ! Rumor of a big battle spread like a grassfire up the valley . Accounts were garbled at the telegraph office when they sent old George down to Parkersburg for the news . `` All dey know down dere is it were at Manassas Junction and it were a big fight '' , the old man told them . In the next few days they had cause to rejoice . It had been a big battle , and the Confederate forces had won . Jonathan and Ben were not on the lists of the dead or on that of the missing . Kate and Mrs. Tussle waited for letters anxiously . Joel went to the crest of a hill behind the house and lit an enormous victory bonfire to celebrate . When Kate hurried in alarm to tell him to put it out , she saw other dots of flames among the western Virginia hills from the few scattered fires of the faithful . They all prayed now that the North would realize that peace must come , for Virginia had defended her land victoriously . The week after Manassas the sound of horses in the yard brought Kate up in shock from an afternoon's rest when she saw the Federal soldiers from her upstairs window . They had already lost most of their corn , she thought . Were they to be insulted again because of the South's great victory ? ? She remembered McClellan's last proclamation as she hurried fearfully down the stairs . At the landing she saw Juanita , her face flushed pink with excitement , run down the hall from the kitchen to the front door . Juanita stopped just inside the open door , her hand to her mouth . As Kate came swiftly down the stairs to the hall she saw Colonel Marsh framed in the doorway , his face set in the same vulnerable look Juanita wore . Kate greeted him gravely , uneasy with misgivings at his visit . `` What brings you here again , Colonel Marsh '' ? ? She asked , taking him and Juanita into the parlor where the shutters were closed against the afternoon sun . `` I stopped to say goodbye , Mrs. Lattimer , and to tell you how sorry I was to hear about your baby . I wish our doctor could have saved her '' . `` It was a terrible loss to me '' , said Kate quietly , feeling the pain twist again at the mention , knowing now that Juanita must have written to him at Grafton . `` Where will you go now that you're leaving Parkersburg '' ? ? She asked him , seeing Juanita's eyes grow bleak . `` As you know , General McClellan has been occupying Beverly . He has notified me that he has orders to go to Washington to take over the Army of the Potomac . I am to go to Washington to serve with him '' . `` When are you to leave '' ? ? Kate asked , watching them both now anxiously . Their eyes betrayed too much of their emotions , she thought sadly . `` Tomorrow . Would you permit Juanita to walk about the grounds with me for a short spell , Mrs. Lattimer '' ? ? `` Stay here in the parlor where it's cool '' , she said , trying to be calm . It would be better for Joel and Uncle Randolph and Mrs. Tussle not to see them . Kate went back and reminded the kitchen women of the supper preparations . Then she took iced lemonade to Marsh's young aide where he sat in the cool of the big trees around the flower garden . When Marsh called to his aide and the pair rode off down the River Road where the gentians burned blue , Juanita was shaken and trying not to cry . She sought Kate out upstairs , her lips trembling . `` He wants me to go with him tomorrow '' , she told Kate . `` What do you want to do '' ? ? Kate asked , uneasy at the gravity of the girl's dilemma . `` I could go with him . He knows me as your niece , which , of course , I am . But I am a slave ! ! You own me . It's your decision '' , said Juanita , holding her face very still , trying to contain the bitterness of her voice as she enunciated her words too distinctly . `` No , the decision is yours . I have held your papers of manumission since I married Mr. Lattimer '' . The red glow from the cove had died out of the sky . The two in the bed knew each other as old people know the partners with whom they have shared the same bed for many years , and they needed to say no more . The things left unsaid they both felt deeply , and with a sigh they fell back on the well-stuffed pillows . Anita put out the remaining candles with a long snuffer , and in the smell of scented candlewick , the comforting awareness of each other's bodies , the retained pattern of dancers and guests remembered , their minds grew numb and then empty of images . They slept -- Mynheer with a marvelously high-pitched snoring , the damn seahorse ivory teeth watching him from a bedside table . In the ballroom below , the dark had given way to moonlight coming in through the bank of French windows . It was a delayed moon , but now the sky had cleared of scudding black and the stars sugared the silver-gray sky . Martha Schuyler , old , slow , careful of foot , came down the great staircase , dressed in her best lace-drawn black silk , her jeweled shoe buckles held forward . `` Well , I'm here at last '' , she said , addressing the old portraits on the walls . `` I don't hear the music . I am getting deaf , I must admit it '' . She came to the ballroom and stood on the two carpeted steps that led down to it . `` Where is everyone ? ? I say , where is everyone ? ? Peter , you lummox , you've forgot to order the musicians '' . She stood there , a large old woman , smiling at the things she would say to him in the morning , this big foolish baby of a son . There were times now , like this , when she lost control of the time count and moved freely back and forth into three generations . Was it a birthday ball ? ? When Peter had reached his majority at eighteen ? ? Or was it her own first ball as mistress of this big house , a Van Rensselaer bride from way upstate near Albany , from Rensselaerwyck . And this handsome booby , staring and sweating , was he her bridegroom ? ? Martha picked up the hem of her gown and with eyes closed she slowly began to dance a stately minuet around the ballroom . David Cortlandt was tired beyond almost the limits of his flesh . He had ridden hard from Boston , and he was not used to horseback . Now , driving the horse and sulky borrowed from Mynheer Schuyler , he felt as if every bone was topped by burning oil and that every muscle was ready to dissolve into jelly and leave his big body helpless and unable to move . The road leading south along the river was shaded with old trees , and in the moonlight the silvery landscape was like a setting for trolls and wood gods rather than the Hudson River Valley of his boyhood memories . He slapped the reins on the back of the powerful gray horse and held on as the sulky's wheels hit a pothole and came out with a jolt and went on . He would cross to Manhattan , to Harlem Heights , before morning . There a certain farmhouse was a station for the Sons of Liberty . He would send on by trusted messenger the dispatches with their electrifying news . And he would sleep , sleep , and never think of roads and horses' sore haunches , of colonial wars . Strange how everything here fitted back into his life , even if he had been away so long . Mynheer , Sir Francis , the valley society , the very smell of the river on his right purling along to the bay past fish weirs and rocks , and ahead the sleepy ribbon of moon-drenched road . A mist was walking on the water , white as cotton , but with a blending and merging grace . Ahead there was a stirring of sudden movement at a crossroads . David reached for the pair of pistols in the saddlebags at his feet . He pulled out one of them and cocked it . A strange wood creature came floating up from a patch of berry bushes . It was a grotesque hen , five or six feet tall . It had the features of a man bewhiskered by clumps of loose feathers . It ran , this apocalyptic beast , on two thin legs , and its wings -- were they feathered arms ? ? -- flapped as it ran . Its groin was bloody . Black strips of skin hung from it . The horse shied at the dreadful thing and flared its nostrils . David took a firm hand with it . The creature in feathers looked around and David saw the mad eyes , glazed with an insane fear . The ungainly bird thing ran away , and to David its croaking sounded like the crowing of a tormented rooster . Then it was gone . He drove on , wary and shaken . The Sons were out tonight . Chapter 10 New York lay bleaching in the summer sun , and the morning fish hawk , flying in the heated air , saw below him the long triangular wedge of Manhattan Island . It was thickly settled by fifteen thousand citizens and laid out into pig-infested streets , mostly around the Battery , going bravely north to Wall Street , but giving up and becoming fields and farms in the region of Harlem Heights . From there it looked across at Westchester County and the Hudson River where the manor houses , estates , and big farms of the original ( non-Indian ) landowners began . On the east side of the island of Manhattan the indifferent hawk knew the East River that connected New York Bay with Long Island Sound . On the western tip of Long Island protruded Brooklyn Heights . It commanded a view over Manhattan and the harbor . A fringe of housing and gardens bearded the top of the heights , and behind it were sandy roads leading past farms and hayfields . Husbandry was bounded by snake-rail fences , and there were grazing cattle . On the shores north and south , the fishers and mooncursers -- smugglers -- lived along the churning Great South Bay and the narrow barrier of sand , Fire Island . The morning hawk , hungry for any eatable , killable , digestible item , kept his eyes on the ring of anchored ships that lay off the shores in the bay , sheltered by the Jersey inlets . They often threw tidbits overboard . The larger ships were near Paulus Hook , already being called , by a few , Jersey City . These were the ships of His Majesty's Navy , herding the hulks of the East Indies merchants and the yachts and ketches of the loyalists . The news of battle on Breed's Hill had already seeped through , and New York itself was now left in the hands of the local Provincial Congress . The fish hawk , his wings not moving , circled and glided lower . The gilt sterns of the men-of-war becoming clearer to him , the sides of the wooden sea walls alternately painted yellow and black , the bronze cannon at the ports . The captain's gig of H.M.S. Mercury was being rowed to H.M.S. Neptune . On shore `` the freed slaves to despotism '' -- the town dwellers -- watched the ships and waited . The chevaux de frise , those sharp stakes and barriers around the fort at the Battery , pointed to a conflict between the town and sea power rolling in glassy swells as the tide came in . Across the bay the Palisades were heavy in green timber ; ; their rock paths led down to the Hudson . Below in the open bay facing Manhattan was Staten Island , gritty with clam shells and mud flats behind which nested farms , cattle barns , and berry thickets . Along Wappinger Creek in Dutchess County , past the white church at Fishkill , past Verplanck's Point on the east bank of the Hudson , to the white salt-crusted roads of the Long Island Rockaways there was a watching and an activity of preparing for something explosive to happen . Today , tomorrow , six months , even perhaps a year The fish hawk flew on and was lost from sight . The British ships rolled at anchor , sent out picket boats and waited for orders from London . Waited for more ships , more lobster-backed infantry , and asked what was to be done with a war of rebellion ? ? David Cortlandt , having slept away a day and a night , came awake in a plank farmhouse on the Harlem River near Spuyten Duyvil . He looked out through windowpanes turned a faint violet by sun and weather , looked out at King's Bridge toward Westchester . The road seemed animated with a few more wagons than usual ; ; a carriage raising up the choking June dust , and beyond , in a meadow , a local militia company drilling with muskets , Kentuck' rifles , every kind of horse pistol , old sword , or cutlass . The wraith-like events of the last few days flooded David's mind and he rubbed his unshaved chin and felt again the ache in his kidneys caused by his saddle odyssey from Boston . Pensive , introspective , he ached . He had sent the dispatches downtown to the proper people and had slept . Now there was more to do . Orders not written down had to be transmitted to the local provincial government . He scratched his mosquito-plagued neck . From the saddlebags , hung on a Hitchcock chair , David took out a good English razor , a present from John Hunter . He found tepid water in a pitcher and a last bit of soap , and he lathered his face and stood stropping the razor on his broad leather belt , its buckle held firm by a knob of the bedpost . He hoped he was free of self-deception . Here he was , suddenly caught up in the delirium of a war , in the spite and calumny of Whigs and Tories . There would be great need soon for his skill as surgeon , but somehow he had not planned to use his knowledge merely for war . David Cortlandt had certain psychic intuitions that this rebellion was not wholly what it appeared on the surface . He knew that many were using it for their own ends . But it did not matter . He stropped the razor slowly ; ; what mattered was that a new concept of Americans was being born . That some men did not want it he could understand . The moral aridity of merchants made them loyal usually to their ledgers . Yet some , like Morris Manderscheid , would bankrupt themselves for the new ideas . Unique circumstances would test us all , he decided . Injury and ingratitude would occur . No doubt John Hancock would do well now ; ; war was a smugglers' heaven . And what of that poor tarred and feathered wretch he had seen on the road driving down from Schuyler's ? ? Things like that would increase rather than be done away with . One had to believe in final events or one was stranded in the abyss of nothing . He saw with John Hunter now that the perfectability of man was a dream . Life was a short play of tenebrous shadows . David began to shave with great sweeping strokes . Time plays an essential part in our mortality , and suddenly for no reason he could imagine ( or admit ) the image of Peg laughing filled his mind -- so desirable , so lusty , so full of nuances of pleasure and joy . He drove sensual patterns off , carefully shaving his long upper lip . It is harder , he muttered , to meditate on man ( or woman ) than on God . David finished shaving , washed his face clean of lather , and combed and retied his hair . He was proud that he had never worn a wig . More and more of the colonials were wearing their own hair and not using powder . He felt cheerful again , refreshed ; ; presentable in his wide-cut brown suit , the well-made riding boots . It is so easy to falsify sentiment . In the meadow below , militia officers shouted at their men and on King's Bridge two boys sat fishing . The future would happen ; ; he did not have to hurry it by thinking too much . A man could be tossed outside the dimension of time by a stray bullet these days . He began to pack the saddlebags . And all this too shall pass away : it came to him out of some dim corner of memory from a church service when he was a boy -- yes , in a white church with a thin spur steeple in the patriarchal Hudson Valley , where a feeling of plenitude was normal in those English-Dutch manors with their well-fed squires . Burly leathered men and wrinkled women in drab black rags carried on in a primitive way , almost unchanged from feudal times . Peasants puzzled Andrei . He wondered how they could go on in poverty , superstition , ignorance , with a complete lack of desire to make either their land or their lives flourish . Andrei remembered a Bathyran meeting long ago . Tolek Alterman had returned from the colonies in Palestine and , before the national leadership , exalted the miracles of drying up swamps and irrigating the desert . A fund-raising drive to buy tractors and machinery was launched . Andrei remembered that his own reaction had been one of indifference . Had he found the meaning too late ? ? It aggravated him . The land of the Lublin Uplands was rich , but no one seemed to care . In the unfertile land in Palestine humans broke their backs pushing will power to the brink . He had sat beside Alexander Brandel at the rostrum of a congress of Zionists . All of them were there in this loosely knit association of diversified ideologies , and each berated the other and beat his breast for his own approaches . When Alexander Brandel rose to speak , the hall became silent . `` I do not care if your beliefs take you along a path of religion or a path of labor or a path of activism . We are here because all our paths travel a blind course through a thick forest , seeking human dignity . Beyond the forest all our paths merge into a single great highway which ends in the barren , eroded hills of Judea . This is our singular goal . How we travel through the forest is for each man's conscience . Where we end our journey is always the same . We all seek the same thing through different ways -- an end to this long night of two thousand years of darkness and unspeakable abuses which will continue to plague us until the Star of David flies over Zion '' . This was how Alexander Brandel expressed pure Zionism . It had sounded good to Andrei , but he did not believe it . In his heart he had no desire to go to Palestine . He loathed the idea of drying up swamps or the chills of malaria or of leaving his natural birthright . Before he went into battle Andrei had told Alex , `` I only want to be a Pole . Warsaw is my city , not Tel Aviv '' . And now Andrei sat on a train on the way to Lublin and wondered if he was not being punished for his lack of belief . Warsaw ! ! He saw the smug eyes of the Home Army chief , Roman , and all the Romans and the faces of the peasants who held only hatred for him . They had let this black hole of death in Warsaw's heart exist without a cry of protest . Once there had been big glittering rooms where Ulanys bowed and kissed the ladies' hands as they flirted from behind their fans . Warsaw ! ! Warsaw ! ! `` Miss Rak . I am a Jew '' . Day by day , week by week , month by month , the betrayal gnawed at Andrei's heart . He ground his teeth together . I hate Warsaw , he said to himself . I hate Poland and all the goddamned mothers' sons of them . All of Poland is a coffin . The terrible vision of the ghetto streets flooded his mind . What matters now ? ? What is beyond this fog ? ? Only Palestine , and I will never live to see Palestine because I did not believe . By late afternoon the train inched into the marshaling yards in the railhead at Lublin , which was filled with lines of cars poised to pour the tools of war to the Russian front . At a siding , another train which was a familiar sight these days . Deportees . Jews . Andrei's skilled eye sized them up . They were not Poles . He guessed by their appearance that they were Rumanians . He walked toward the center of the city to keep his rendezvous with Styka . Of all the places in Poland , Andrei hated Lublin the most . The Bathyrans were all gone . Few of the native Jews who had lived in Lublin were still in the ghetto . From the moment of the occupation Lublin became a focal point . He and Ana watched it carefully . Lublin generally was the forerunner of what would happen elsewhere . Early in 1939 , Odilo Globocnik , the Gauleiter of Vienna , established SS headquarters for all of Poland . The Bathyrans ran a check on Globocnik and had only to conclude that he was in a tug of war with Hans Frank and the civilian administrators . Globocnik built the Death's-Head Corps . Lublin was the seed of action for the `` final solution '' of the Jewish problem . As the messages from Himmler , Heydrich , and Eichmann came in through Alfred Funk , Lublin's fountainhead spouted . A bevy of interlacing lagers , work camps , concentration camps erupted in the area . Sixty thousand Jewish prisoners of war disappeared into Lublin's web . Plans went in and out of Lublin , indicating German confusion . A tale of a massive reservation in the Uplands to hold several million Jews A tale of a plan to ship all Jews to the island of Madagascar Stories of the depravity of the guards at Globocnik's camps struck a chord of terror at the mere mention of their names . Lipowa 7 , Sobibor , Chelmno , Poltawa , Belzec , Krzywy-Rog , Budzyn , Krasnik . Ice baths , electric shocks , lashings , wild dogs , testicle crushers . The Death's-Head Corps took in Ukrainian and Baltic Auxiliaries , and the Einsatzkommandos waded knee-deep in blood and turned into drunken , dope-ridden maniacs . Lublin was their heart . In the spring of 1942 Operation Reinhard began in Lublin . The ghetto , a miniature of Warsaw's , was emptied into the camp in the Majdan-Tartarski suburb called Majdanek . As the camp emptied , it was refilled by a draining of the camps and towns around Lublin , then by deportees from outside Poland . In and in and in they poured through the gates of Majdanek , but they never left , and Majdanek was not growing any larger . What was happening in Majdanek ? ? Was Operation Reinhard the same pattern for the daily trains now leaving the Umschlagplatz in Warsaw ? ? Was there another Majdanek in the Warsaw area , as they suspected ? ? Andrei stopped at Litowski Place and looked around quickly at the boundary of civil buildings . His watch told him he was still early . Down the boulevard he could see a portion of the ghetto wall . He found an empty bench , opened a newspaper , and stretched his legs before him . Krakow Boulevard was filled with black Nazi uniforms and the dirty brownish ones of their Auxiliaries . `` Captain Androfski '' ! ! Andrei glanced up over the top of the paper and looked into the mustached , homely face of Sergeant Styka . Styka sat beside him and pumped his hand excitedly . `` I have been waiting across the street at the post office since dawn . I thought you might get in on a morning train '' . `` It's good to see you again , Styka '' . Styka studied his captain . He almost broke into tears . To him , Andrei Androfski had always been the living symbol of a Polish officer . His captain was thin and haggard and his beautiful boots were worn and shabby . `` Remember to call me Jan '' , Andrei said . Styka nodded and sniffed and blew his nose vociferously . `` When that woman found me and told me that you needed me I was never so happy since before the war '' . `` I'm lucky that you were still living in Lublin '' . Styka grumbled about fate . `` For a time I thought of trying to reach the Free Polish Forces , but one thing led to another . I got a girl in trouble and we had to get married . Not a bad girl . So we have three children and responsibilities . I work at the granary . Nothing like the old days in the army , but I get by . Who complains ? ? Many times I tried to reach you , but I never knew how . I came to Warsaw twice , but there was that damned ghetto wall '' `` I understand '' . Styka blew his nose again . `` Were you able to make the arrangements '' ? ? Andrei asked . `` There is a man named Grabski who is the foreman in charge of the bricklayers at Majdanek . I did exactly as instructed . I told him you are on orders from the Home Army to get inside Majdanek so you can make a report to the government in exile in London '' . `` His answer '' ? ? `` Ten thousand zlotys '' . `` Can he be trusted '' ? ? `` He is aware he will not live for twenty-four hours if he betrays you '' . `` Good man , Styka '' . `` Captain Jan must you go inside Majdanek ? ? The stories Everyone really knows what is happening there '' . `` Not everyone , Styka '' . `` What good will it really do '' ? ? `` I don't know . Perhaps perhaps there is a shred of conscience left in the human race . Perhaps if they know the story there will be a massive cry of indignation '' . `` Do you really believe that , Jan '' ? ? `` I have to believe it '' . Styka shook his head slowly . `` I am only a simple soldier . I cannot think things out too well . Until I was transferred into the Seventh Ulanys I was like every other Pole in my feeling about Jews . I hated you when I first came in . But my captain might have been a Jew , but he wasn't a Jew . What I mean is , he was a Pole and the greatest soldier in the Ulanys . Hell , sir . The men of our company had a dozen fights defending your name . You never knew about it , but by God , we taught them respect for Captain Androfski '' . Andrei smiled . `` Since the war I have seen the way the Germans have behaved and I think , Holy Mother , we have behaved like this for hundreds of years . Why '' ? ? `` How can you tell an insane man to reason or a blind man to see '' ? ? `` But we are neither blind nor insane . The men of your company would not allow your name dishonored . Why do we let the Germans do this '' ? ? `` I have sat many hours with this , Styka . All I ever wanted was to be a free man in my own country . I've lost faith , Styka . I used to love this country and believe that someday we'd win our battle for equality . But now I think I hate it very much '' . `` And do you really think that the world outside Poland will care any more than we do '' ? ? The question frightened Andrei . `` Please don't go inside Majdanek '' . `` I'm still a soldier in a very small way , Styka '' . It was an answer that Styka understood . Grabski's shanty was beyond the bridge over the River Bystrzyca near the rail center . Grabski sat in a sweat-saturated undershirt , cursing the excessive heat which clamped an uneasy stillness before sundown . He was a square brick of a man with a moon-round face and sunken Polish features . Flies swarmed around the bowl of lentils in which he mopped thick black bread . Half of it dripped down his chin . He washed it down with beer and produced a deep-seated belch . `` Well '' ? ? Andrei demanded . Grabski looked at the pair of them . He grunted a sort of `` yes '' answer . `` My cousin works at the Labor Bureau . He can make you work papers . It will take a few days . I will get you inside the guard camp as a member of my crew . I don't know if I can get you into the inner camp . Maybe yes , maybe no , but you can observe everything from the roof of a barrack we are building '' . Grabski slurped his way to the bottom of the soup bowl . `` Can't understand why the hell anyone wants to go inside that son-of-a-bitch place '' . `` Orders from the Home Army '' . `` Why ? ? Nothing there but Jews '' . Andrei shrugged . `` We get strange orders '' . `` Well -- what about the money '' ? ? Andrei peeled off five one-thousand-zloty notes . Grabski had never seen so much money . His broad flat fingers , petrified into massive sausages by years of bricklaying , snatched the bills clumsily . `` This ain't enough '' . `` You get the rest when I'm safely out of Majdanek '' . `` I ain't taking no goddamned chances for no Jew business '' . Andrei and Styka were silent . She was getting real dramatic . I'd have been more impressed if I hadn't remembered that she'd played Hedda Gabler in her highschool dramatics course . I didn't want her back on that broken record . `` Nothing's free in the whole goddam world '' , was all I could think of to say . When I'd delivered myself of that gem there was nothing to do but order up another drink . `` I am '' , she said . I'd forgotten all about Thelma and the Kentucky Derby and how it was Thelma's fifty dollars I was spending . It was just me and Eileen getting drunk together like we used to in the old days , and me staring at her across the table crazy to get my hands on her partly because I wanted to wring her neck because she was so ornery but mostly because she was so wonderful to touch . Drunk or sober she was the most attractive woman in the world for me . I was crazy about her all over again . It was the call of the wild all right . That evening turned out to be hell like all the others . We moved down Broadway from ginmill to ginmill . It was the same old routine . Eileen got to dancing , just a little tiny dancing step to a hummed tune that you could hardly notice , and trying to pick up strange men , but each time I was ready to say to hell with it and walk out she'd pull herself together and talk so understandingly in that sweet husky voice about the good times and the happiness we'd had together and there I was back on the hook . I did have the decency to call up Thelma and tell her I'd met old friends and would be home late . `` I could scratch her eyes out '' , Eileen cried and stamped her foot when I came back from the phone booth . `` You know I don't like my men to have other women . I hate it . I hate it '' . She got so drunk I had to take her home . It was a walk up on Hudson Street . She just about made me carry her upstairs and then she clung to me and wouldn't let me go . There was a man's jacket on the chair and a straw hat on the table . The place smelt of some kind of hair lotion these pimplike characters use . `` What about Ballestre '' ? ? I had to shake her to make her listen . `` Precious . What about him '' ? ? Suddenly she was very mysterious and dramatic . `` Precious and I allow each other absolute freedom . We are above being jealous . He's used to me bringing home strange men . I'll just tell him you're my husband . He can't object to that '' . `` Well I object . If he pokes his nose in here I'll slug him '' . `` That really would be funny '' . She began to laugh . She was still laughing when I grabbed her and started rolling her on the bed . After all I'm made of flesh and blood . I'm not a plaster saint . Waking up was horrible . Never in my life have I felt so remorseful about anything I've done as I did about spending that night with my own wife . We both had hangovers . Eileen declared she couldn't lift her head from the pillow . She lay under the covers making jabbing motions with her forefinger telling me where to look for the coffeepot . I was stumbling in my undershirt trying to find my way around her damn kitchenette when I smelt that sickish sweet hairtonic smell . There was somebody else in the apartment . I stiffened . Honest I could feel the hair stand up on the back of my neck like a dog's that is going to get into a fight . I turned around with the percolator in my hand . My eyes were so bleary I could barely see him but there he was , a little smooth olivefaced guy in a new spring overcoat and a taffycolored fedora . Brown eyes , eyebrow mustache . Oval face without an expression in the world . We didn't have time to speak before Eileen's voice was screeching at us from the bed . `` Joseph Maria Ballestre meet Francis Xavier Bowman . Exboyfriend meet exhusband '' . She gave the nastiest laugh I ever heard . `` And don't either of you forget that I'm not any man's property . If you want to fight , go down on the sidewalk '' . She was enjoying the situation . Imagine that . Eileen was a psychologist all right . Instead of wanting to sock the poor bastard I found myself having a fellowfeeling for him . Maybe he felt the same way . I never felt such a lowdown hound in my life . First thing I knew he was in the kitchenette cooking up the breakfast and I was handing Eileen her coffeecup and she was lying there handsome as a queen among her courtiers . I couldn't face Thelma after that night . I didn't even have the nerve to call her on the telephone . I wrote her that I'd met up with Eileen and that old bonds had proved too strong and asked her to send my clothes down by express . Of course I had to give her Eileen's address , but she never came near us . All she did was write me a pleasant little note about how it was beautiful while it lasted but that now life had parted our ways and it was goodbye forever . She never said a word about the fifty dollars . She added a postscript begging me to be careful about drinking . I must know that that was my greatest weakness underlined three times . Afterwards I learned that Eileen had called Thelma on the telephone and made a big scene about Thelma trying to take her husband away . That finished me with Thelma . Trust Eileen to squeeze all the drama out of a situation . And there I was shacked up with Eileen in that filthy fourth floor attic on Hudson Street . I use the phrase advisedly because there was something positively indecent about our relationship . I felt it and it ate on me all the time , but I didn't know how right I was till later . What I did know was that Precious was always around . He slept in the hall bedroom at the head of the stairs . `` Who do you think pays the rent ? ? You wouldn't have me throw the poor boy out on the street '' , Eileen said when I needled her about it . I said sure that was what I wanted her to do but she paid no attention . Eileen had a wonderful way of not listening to things she didn't want to hear . Still I didn't think she was twotiming me with Precious right then . To be on the safe side I never let Eileen get out of my sight day or night . Precious had me worried . I couldn't make out what his racket was . I'd thought him a pimp or procurer but he didn't seem to be . He was smooth and civil spoken but it seemed to me there was something tough under his selfeffacing manner . Still he let Eileen treat him like a valet . Whenever the place was cleaned or a meal served it was Precious who did the work . I never could find out what his business was . He always seemed to have money in his pocket . The phone had been disconnected but telegrams came for him and notes by special messenger . Now and then he would disappear for several days . `` Connections '' was all he would say with that smooth hurt smile when I put leading questions . `` Oh he's just an international spy '' , Eileen would shout with her screechy laugh . Poor devil he can't have been too happy either . He got no relief from drink because , though sometimes Precious would buy himself a drink if he went out with us in the evening , he'd leave it on the table untouched . When I was in liquor I rode him pretty hard I guess . Occasionally if I pushed him too far he'd give me a look out of narrowed eyes and the hard cruel bony skull would show through that smooth face of his . `` Some day '' , I told Eileen , `` that guy will kill us both '' . She just wouldn't listen . Getting drunk every night was the only way I could handle the situation . Eileen seemed to feel the same way . We still had that much in common . The trouble was drinking cost money . The way Eileen and I were hitting it up , we needed ten or fifteen dollars an evening . Eileen must have wheedled a little out of Precious . I raised some kale by hocking the good clothes I had left over from my respectable uptown life , but when that was gone I didn't have a cent . I don't know what we would have done if Pat O'Dwyer hadn't come to town . Pat O'Dwyer looked like a heavier Jim . He had the same bullet head of curly reddish hair but he didn't have Jim's pokerfaced humor or his brains or his charm . He was a big thick beefy violent man . Now Pat may have been a lecher and a plugugly , but he was a good churchgoing Catholic and he loved his little sister . Those O'Dwyers had that Irish clannishness that made them stick together in spite of politics and everything . Pat took Eileen and me out to dinner at a swell steak house and told us with tears in his eyes how happy he was we had come together again . `` Whom God hath joined '' etcetera . The O'Dwyers were real religious people except for Kate . Now it would be up to me to keep the little girl out of mischief . Pat had been worried as hell ever since she'd lost her job on that fashion magazine . It had gone big with the Hollywood girls when he told them his sister was an editor of Art And Apparel . How about me trying to help her get her job back ? ? All evening Eileen had been as demure as a little girl getting ready for her first communion . It just about blew us both out of the water when Eileen suddenly came out with what she came out with . `` But brother I can't take a job right now '' , she said with her eyes on her ice cream , `` I'm going to have a baby , Francis Xavier's baby , my own husband's baby '' . My first thought was how had it happened so soon , but I counted back on my fingers and sure enough we'd been living together six weeks . Pat meanwhile was bubbling over with sentiment . Greatest thing that ever happened . Now Eileen really would have to settle down to love honor and obey , and she'd have to quit drinking . He'd come East for the christening , by God he would . When we separated that evening Pat pushed a hundred dollar bill into Eileen's hand to help towards a layette . Before he left town Pat saw to it that I was fixed up with a job . Pat had contacts all over the labor movement . A friend of Pat's named Frank Sposato had just muscled into the Portwatchers' Union . The portwatchers were retired longshoremen and small time seafarers off towboats and barges who acted as watchmen on the wharves . Most of them were elderly men . It was responsible and sometimes dangerous work because the thieving is awful in the port of New York . They weren't as well paid as they should have been . One reason the portwatchers let Sposato take them over was to get the protection of his musclemen . Sposato needed a front , some labor stiff with a clean record to act as business agent of the Redhook local . There I was a retired wobbly and structural iron worker who'd never gouged a cent off a fellow worker in my thirty years in the movement . For once radicalism was a recommendation . Sposato couldn't wait to get me hired . With my gray hair and my weatherbeaten countenance I certainly looked the honest working stiff . The things a man will do for a woman . There was one fact which Rector could not overlook , one truth which he could not deny . As long as there were two human beings working together on the same project , there would be competition and you could no more escape it than you could expect to escape the grave . No matter how devoted a man was , no matter how fully he gave his life to the Lord , he could never extinguish that one spark of pride that gave him definition as an individual . All of the jobs in the mission might be equal in the eyes of the Lord , but they were certainly not equal in the eyes of the Lord's servants . It was only natural that Fletcher would strive for a position in which he could make the decisions . Even Rector himself was prey to this spirit of competition and he knew it , not for a more exalted office in the hierarchy of the church -- his ambitions for the bishopry had died very early in his career -- but for the one clear victory he had talked about to the colonel . He was not sure how much of this desire was due to his devotion to the church and how much was his own ego , demanding to be satisfied , for the two were intertwined and could not be separated . He wanted desperately to see Kayabashi defeated , the Communists in the village rooted out , the mission standing triumphant , for in the triumph of the Lord he himself would be triumphant , too . But perhaps this was a part of the eternal plan , that man's ambition when linked with God would be a driving , indefatigable force for good in the world . He sighed . How foolish it was to try to fathom the truth in an area where only faith would suffice . He would have to work without questioning the motives which made him work and content himself with the thought that the eventual victory , however it was brought about , would be sweet indeed . His first move was to send Hino to the village to spend a few days . His arm had been giving him some trouble and Rector was not enough of a medical expert to determine whether it had healed improperly or whether Hino was simply rebelling against the tedious work in the print shop , using the stiffness in his arm as an excuse . In any event Rector sent him to the local hospital to have it checked , telling him to keep his ears open while he was in the village to see if he could find out what Kayabashi was planning . Hino was elated at the prospect . He was allowed to spend his nights at an inn near the hospital and he was given some extra money to go to the pachinko parlor -- an excellent place to make contact with the enemy . He left with all the joyous spirit of a child going on a holiday , nodding attentively as Rector gave him his final instructions . He was to get involved in no arguments ; ; he was to try to make no converts ; ; he was simply to listen and report back what he heard . It was a ridiculous situation and Rector knew it , for Hino , frankly partisan , openly gregarious , would make a poor espionage agent . If he wanted to know anything , he would end up asking about it point-blank , but in this guileless manner he would probably receive more truthful answers than if he tried to get them by indirection . In all of his experience in the mission field Rector had never seen a convert quite like Hino . From the moment that Hino had first walked into the mission to ask for a job , any job -- his qualifications neatly written on a piece of paper in a precise hand -- he had been ready to become a Christian . He had already been studying the Bible ; ; he knew the fundamentals , and after studying with Fletcher for a time he approached Rector , announced that he wanted to be baptized and that was that . Rector had never been able to find out much about Hino's past . Hino talked very little about himself except for the infrequent times when he used a personal illustration in connection with another subject . Putting the pieces of this mosaic together , Rector had the vague outlines of a biography . Hino was the fourth son of an elderly farmer who lived on the coast , in Chiba , and divided his life between the land and the sea , supplementing the marginal livelihood on his small rented farm with seasonal employment on a fishing boat . Without exception Hino's brothers turned to either one or both of their father's occupations , but Hino showed a talent for neither and instead spent most of his time on the beach where he repaired nets and proved immensely popular as a storyteller . He had gone into the Japanese navy , had been trained as an officer , had participated in one or two battles -- he never went into detail regarding his military experience -- and at the age of twenty-five , quite as a bolt out of the blue , he had walked into the mission as if he belonged here and had become a Christian . Rector was often curious ; ; often tempted to ask questions but he never did . If and when Hino decided to tell him about his experiences , he would do so unasked . Rector had no doubt that Hino would come back from the village bursting with information , ready to impart it with his customary gusto , liberally embellished with his active imagnation . When the telephone rang on the day after Hino went down to the village , Rector had a hunch it would be Hino with some morsel of information too important to wait until his return , for there were few telephones in the village and the phone in Rector's office rarely rang unless it was important . He was surprised to find Kayabashi's secretary on the other end of the line . He was even more startled when he heard what Kayabashi wanted . The oyabun was entertaining a group of dignitaries , the secretary said , businessmen from Tokyo for the most part , and Kayabashi wished to show them the mission . They had never seen one before and had expressed a curiosity about it . `` Oh '' ? ? Rector said . `` I guess it will be all right . When would the oyabun like to bring his guests up here '' ? ? `` This afternoon '' , the secretary said . `` At three o'clock if it will be of convenience to you at that time '' . `` All right '' , Rector said . `` I will be expecting them '' . He was about to hang up the phone , but a note of hesitancy in the secretary's voice left the conversation open . He had something more to say . `` I beg to inquire if the back is now safe for travelers '' , he said . Rector laughed despite himself . `` Unless the oyabun has been working on it '' , he said , then checked himself and added : `` You can tell Kayabashi-san that the back road is in very good condition and will be quite safe for his party to use '' . `` Arigato gosaimasu '' . The secretary sighed with relief and then the telephone clicked in Rector's hand . Rector had no idea why Kayabashi wanted to visit the mission . For the oyabun to make such a trip was either a sign of great weakness or an indication of equally great confidence , and from all the available information it was probably the latter . Kayabashi must feel fairly certain of his victory in order to make a visit like this , a trip which could be so easily misinterpreted by the people in the village . At the same time , it was unlikely that any businessmen would spend a day in a Christian mission out of mere curiosity . No , Kayabashi was bringing his associates here for a specific purpose and Rector would not be able to fathom it until they arrived . When he had given the call a few moments thought , he went into the kitchen to ask Mrs. Yamata to prepare tea and sushi for the visitors , using the formal English china and the silver tea service which had been donated to the mission , then he went outside to inspect the grounds . Fujimoto had a pile of cuttings near one side of the lawn . Rector asked him to move it for the time being ; ; he wanted the mission compound to be effortlessly spotless . A good initial impression would be important now . He went into the print shop , where Fletcher had just finished cleaning the press . `` How many pamphlets do we have in stock '' ? ? Rector said . `` I should say about a hundred thousand '' , Fletcher said . `` Why '' ? ? `` I would like to enact a little tableau this afternoon '' , Rector said , He explained about the visit and the effect he wished to create , the picture of a very busy mission . He did not wish to deceive Kayabashi exactly , just to display the mission activities in a graphic and impressive manner . Fletcher nodded as he listened to the instructions and said he would arrange the things Rector requested . Rector's next stop was at the schoolroom , where Mavis was monitoring a test . He beckoned to her from the door and she slipped quietly outside . He told her of the visitors and then of his plans . `` How many children do you have present today '' ? ? He said . She looked back toward the schoolroom . `` Fifteen '' , she said . `` No , only fourteen . The little Ito girl had had to go home . She has a pretty bad cold '' . `` I would like them to appear very busy today , not busy exactly , but joyous , exuberant , full of life . I want to create the impression of a compound full of children . Do you think you can manage it '' ? ? Mavis smiled . `` I'll try '' . As Rector was walking back toward the residential hall , Johnson came out of the basement and bounded up to him . The altercation in the coffee house had done little to dampen his spirits , but he was still a little wary around Rector for they had not yet discussed the incident . `` I think I've fixed the pump so we won't have to worry about it for a long time '' , he said . `` I've adjusted the gauge so that the pump cuts out before the water gets too low . '' `` Fine '' , Rector said . He looked out over the expanse of the compound . It was going to take a lot of activity to fill it . `` Have you ever operated a transit '' ? ? He said . `` No , sir '' , Johnson said . `` You are about to become a first-class surveyor '' , Rector said . `` When Konishi gets back with the jeep , I want you to round up two or three Japanese boys . Konishi can help you . You'll find an old transit in the basement . The glass is out of it , but that won't matter . It looks pretty efficient and that's the important thing '' . He went on to explain what he had in mind . Johnson nodded . He said he could do it . Rector was warming to his over-all strategy by the time he got back to the residential hall . It was rather a childish game , all in all , but everybody seemed to be getting into the spirit of the thing and he could not remember when he had enjoyed planning anything quite so much . He was not sure what effect it would have , but that was really beside the point when you got right down to it . He was not going to lose the mission by default , and whatever reason Kayabashi had for bringing his little sight-seeing group to the mission , he was going to be in for a surprise . He found Elizabeth in the parlor and asked her to make sure everything was in order in the residential hall , and then to take charge of the office while the party was here . When everything had been done , Rector went back to his desk to occupy himself with his monthly report until three o'clock . At two thirty he sent Fujimoto to the top of the wall at the northeast corner of the mission to keep an eye on the ridge road and give a signal when he first glimpsed the approach of Kayabashi's party . Then Rector , attired in his best blue serge suit , sat in a chair out on the lawn , in the shade of a tree , smoking a cigarette and waiting . The air was cooler here , and the lacy pattern of the trees threw a dappled shadow on the grass , an effect which he found pleasant . She concluded by asking him to name another hour should this one be inconvenient . The fish took the bait . He replied that he could not imagine what importance there might be in thus meeting with a stranger , but -- joy of joys , he would be at home at the hour mentioned . But when she called he had thought better of the matter and decided not to involve himself in a new entanglement . She was told by the manservant who opened the door that his lordship was engaged on work from which he had left strict orders he was not to be disturbed . Claire was bitterly disappointed but determined not to let the rebuff daunt her purpose . She wrote again and now , abandoning for the moment the theme of love , she asked for help in the matter of her career . She could act and she could write . His lordship was concerned in the management of Drury Lane but , if there were no opportunities there , would he read and criticize her novel ? ? At last he consented to meet her , and following that brief interview Claire wrote him a yet more remarkable proposal : Have you any objection to the following plan ? ? On Thursday evening we may go out of town together by some stage or mail about the distance of ten or twelve miles . There we shall be free and unknown ; ; we can return the following morning She concluded by asking for a brief interview -- `` to settle with you where '' -- and she threw in a tribute to his `` gentle manners '' and `` the wild originality of your countenance '' . She opened his reply with trembling fingers he agreed ! ! And he would see her that evening . Victory at last ! ! At their meeting he told her not to bother about `` where '' -- he would attend to that . There was one of the new forte-pianos in the room and , as Claire rose to go , he asked her to sing him one song before she left . She sang him Scott's charming ballad `` Rosabelle '' , which was the vogue of the moment . She had never sung better . `` Your voice is delightful '' , he approved with a warm smile . `` Tomorrow will be a new experience -- I have never before made love to a nightingale . There have been cooing doves , chattering magpies , thieving jackdaws , a proud peacock , a silly goose , and a harpy eagle -- whom I was silly enough to mate with and who is now busy tearing at my vitals '' . And so they went , he choosing of all places an inn near Medmenham Abbey , scene a generation ago of the obscene orgies of the Hellfire Club . He regaled Claire with an account of the mock mass performed by the cassocked bloods , which he had had at firsthand from old Bud Dodington , one of the leaders of the so-called `` Order '' . Each wore the monkish scourge at his waist but this , it seems , was not employed for self-flagellation . Naked girls danced in the chancel of the Abbey , the youngest and seemingly the most innocent being chosen to read a sermon filled with veiled depravities . The jaded amorist conjured up pictures of the blasphemous rites with relish . Alas , all that belonged to the age of `` Devil Dashwood '' and `` Wicked Wilkes '' , abbot and beadsman of the Order ! ! The casual seduction of a seventeen-year-old bluestocking seemed tame by comparison . They passed close by the turn to Bishopsgate . A scant half mile away Shelley and Mary were doubtless sitting on their diminutive terrace , the air about them scented with stock , and listening to the nightingale who had nested in the big lime tree at the foot of the garden . Charming and peaceful -- but what were charm and peace compared to high adventure ? ? Alone with the fabulous Byron ! ! How many women had longed for the privilege that was hers . How was she to behave , Claire wondered . To be passive , to be girlishly shy was palpably absurd . She was the pursuer as clearly as was Venus in Shakespeare's poem . And while her Adonis did not suffer from inexperience , satiety might well be an equal handicap . No , she would not pretend modesty , but neither must she be crudely bold . Mystery -- that was the thing . In the bedroom she would insist on darkness . With his club foot he might well be grateful . At the inn , which was situated close to a broad weir , Byron was greeted by the landlord with obsequious deference and addressed as `` milord '' . The place was evidently a familiar haunt and Claire wondered what other illicit loves had been celebrated in the comfortable rooms to which they were shown . The fire in the sitting room was lighted . `` What about the bedroom '' ? ? Byron inquired . `` Seems to me last time I was here the grate bellowed out smoke as it might have been preparing us for hell '' . `` We found some owls had built a nest in the chimney , milord , but I promise you you'll never have trouble of that sort again '' . So , not only had he been here before , but it seemed he might well come again . Claire felt suddenly small and cheap , heroine of a trivial episode in the voluminous history of Don Juan . A cold supper was ordered and a bottle of port . When Napoleon's ship had borne him to Elba , French wines had started to cross the Channel , the first shipments in a dozen war-ridden years , but the supplies had not yet reached rural hostelries where the sweet wines of the Spanish peninsula still ruled . As they waited for supper they sat by the fire , glasses in hand , while Byron philosophized as much for his own entertainment as hers . `` Sex is overpriced '' , he said . `` The great Greek tragedies are concerned with man against Fate , not man against man for the prize of a woman's body . So don't see yourself as a heroine or fancy this little adventure is an event of major importance '' . `` The gods seemed to think sex pretty important '' , she rebutted . `` Mars and Venus , Bacchus and Ariadne , Jupiter and Io , Byron and the nymph of the owl's nest . That would be Minerva , I suppose . Wasn't the owl her symbol '' ? ? Byron laughed . `` So you know something of the classics , do you '' ? ? `` Tell me about Minerva , how she behaved , what she did to please you '' . `` I'll tell you nothing . I don't ask you who 'tis you're being unfaithful to , husband or lover . Frankly , I don't care '' . For a moment she thought of answering with the truth but she knew there were men who shied away from virginity , who demanded some degree of education in body as well as mind . `` Very well '' , she said , `` I'll not catechize you . What matter the others so long as I have my place in history '' . She was striking the right note . No man ever had a better opinion of himself and indeed , with one so favored , flattery could hardly seem overdone . Brains and beauty , high position in both the social and intellectual worlds , athlete , fabled lover -- if ever the world was any man's oyster it was his . The light supper over , Claire went to him and , slipping an arm about his shoulder , sat on his knee . He drew her close and , hand on cheek , turned her face to his . Her lips , moist and parted , spoke his name . `` Byron '' ! ! His hand went to her shoulder and pushed aside the knotted scarf that surmounted the striped poplin gown ; ; then , to better purpose , he took hold of the knot and with dextrous fingers , untied it . The bodice beneath was buttoned and , withdrawing his lips from hers , he set her upright on his knee and started to undo it , unhurriedly as if she were a child . But , kindled by his kiss , his caressing hand , her desire was aflame . She sprang up and went swiftly to the bedroom . Lord Byron poured himself another glass of wine and held it up to the candle flame admiring the rich color . He drank slowly with due appreciation . It was an excellent vintage . He rose and went to the bedroom . Pausing in the doorway he said : `` The form of the human female , unlike her mind and her spirit , is the most challenging loveliness in all nature '' . When Claire returned to Bishopsgate she longed to tell them she had become Byron's mistress . By odd coincidence , on the evening of her return Shelley chose to read Parisina , which was the latest of the titled poet's successes . As he declaimed the sonorous measures , it was as much as Claire could do to restrain herself from bursting out with her dramatic tidings . `` Although it is not the best of which he is capable '' , said Shelley as he closed the book , `` it is still poetry of a high order '' . `` If he would only leave the East '' , said Mary . `` I am tired of sultans and scimitars '' . `` The hero of his next poem is Napoleon Bonaparte '' , said Claire , with slightly overdone carelessness . `` How do you know that '' ? ? Demanded Mary . `` I was told it on good authority '' , Claire answered darkly . `` I mustn't tell , I mustn't tell '' , she repeated to herself . `` I promised him I wouldn't '' . Chapter 9 winter came , and with it Mary's baby -- a boy as she had wished . William , he was called , in honor of the man who was at once Shelley's pensioner and his most bitter detractor . With a pardonable irony Shelley wrote to the father who had publicly disowned his daughter : `` Fanny and Mrs. Godwin will probably be glad to hear that Mary has safely recovered from a very favorable confinement , and that her child is well '' . At the same time another child -- this one of Shelley's brain -- was given to the world : Alastor , a poem of pervading beauty in which the reader may gaze into the still depths of a fine mind's musings . Alastor was published only to be savagely attacked , contemptuously ignored . Shelley sent a copy to Southey , a former friend , and another to Godwin . Neither acknowledged the gift . Only Mary's praise sustained him in his disappointment . She understood completely . Not a thought nor a cadence was missed in her summary of appreciation . `` You have made the labor worth while '' , he said to her , smiling . `` And in the future , since I write for a public of one , I can save the poor publishers from wasting their money '' . `` A public of one '' , Mary echoed reprovingly . `` How can you say such a thing ? ? There will be thousands who will thrill to the loveliness of Alastor . There are some even now . What about that dear , clever Mr. Thynne ? ? I am sure he is in raptures '' . `` Poor Mr. Thynne , he always has to be trotted out for my encouragement '' . `` There are other Mr. Thynnes . Not everyone is bewitched by Byron's caliphs and harem beauties '' . Mary's supercritical attitude toward Byron had nothing to do with his moral disrepute . She was resentful of his easy success as compared with Shelley's failure . The same month that Alastor was published , Murray sold twenty thousand copies of The Siege Of Corinth , a slovenly bit of Byronism that even Shelley's generosity rebelled at . The lordly poet was at low-water mark . The careless writing was in keeping with his mood of savage discontent . On all sides doors were being slammed in his face . The previous scandals , gaily diverting as they were , had only served to increase his popularity . Now , under the impact of his wife's disclosures , he was brought suddenly to the realization that there was a limit to tolerance , however brilliant , however far-famed the offender might be . He tried defiance and openly flaunted his devotion to his half sister , but he soon saw , as did she , that this course if persisted in would involve them in a common ruin . For the moment there was no woman in his life , and it was this vacuum that had given Claire her opportunity . But the liaison successfully started in the last days of autumn was now languishing . Byron , since the separation from his wife had been living in a smallish house in Piccadilly Terrace . He refused to bring Claire to it even as an occasional visitor , claiming that his every move was watched by spies of the Milbankes . Beckworth handed the pass to the colonel . He had thought that the suggestion of taking it himself would tip the colonel in the direction of serving his own order , but the slip of paper was folded and absently thrust into the colonel's belt . Despite his yearning , the colonel would not go down to see the men come through the lines . He would remain in the tent , waiting impatiently , occupied by some trivial task . -- Beckworth . -- Sir ? ? -- Fetch me the copies of everything B and C companies have requisitioned in the last six months . -- The last six months , sir ? ? -- You heard me . There's a lot of waste going on here . It's got to stop . I want to take a look . This is no damned holiday , Beckworth . Get busy . -- Yes , sir . Beckworth left the tent . Below he could see the bright torches lighting the riverbank . He glanced back . The colonel crouched tensely on one of the folding chairs , methodically tearing at his thumbnail . The bombproof was a low-ceilinged structure of heavy timbers covered with earth . It stood some fifty paces from the edge of the bank . From the outside , it seemed no more than a low drumlin , a lump on the dark earth . A crude ladder ran down to a wooden floor . Two slits enabled observers to watch across the river . The place smelled strongly of rank , fertile earth , rotting wood and urine . The plank floor was slimed beneath Watson's boots . At least the Union officer had been decent enough to provide a candle . There was no place to sit , but Watson walked slowly from the ladder to the window slits and back , stooping slightly to avoid striking his head on the heavy beams . In the corner was the soldier with the white flag . He stood stiffly erect , clutching the staff , his body half hidden by the limp cloth . Watson hardly looked at him . The man had come floundering aboard the flat-bottomed barge at the last instant , brandishing the flag of truce . Someone had hauled him over the side , and he had remained silent while they crossed . An officer with a squad of men had been waiting on the bank . The men in the boats had started yelling happily at first sight of the officer , two of them calling him Billy . When the boat had touched , the weaker ones and the two wounded men had been lifted out and carried away by the soldiers . Watson had presented his pouch and been led to the bombproof . The officer had told him that both lists must be checked . Watson had given his name and asked for a safe-conduct pass . The officer , surprised , said he would have to see . Watson had nodded absently and muttered that he would check the lists himself later . He had peered through the darkness at the rampart . The men he would take back across the river stood there , but he turned away from them . He wanted no part of the emotions of the exchange , no memory of the joy and gratitude that other men felt . He had hoped to be alone in the bombproof , but the soldier had followed him . Though Watson carefully ignored the man , he could not deny his presence . Perhaps it would be better to speak to him , since silence could not exorcise his form . Watson glanced briefly at him , seeing only a body rigidly erect behind the languid banner . -- We won't be too long . If my pass is approved , I may be a half hour . The soldier answered in a curious , muffled voice , his lips barely moving . Watson turned away and did not see the man's knees buckle and his body sag . -- Yes , sir . He had acknowledged the man . It was easier to think now , Watson decided . The stiff figure in the corner no longer blocked his thoughts . He paced slowly , stooping , staring at the damp , slippery floor . He tried to order the words of the three Union officers , seeking to create some coherent portrait of the dead boy . But he groped blindly . His lack of success steadily eroded his interest . He stopped pacing , leaned against the dank , timbered wall and let his mind drift . A feeling of futility , an enervation of mind greater than any fatigue he had ever known , seeped through him . What in the name of God was he doing , crouched in a timbered pit on the wrong bank of the river ? ? Why had he crossed the dark water , to bring back a group of reclaimed soldiers or to skulk in a foul-smelling hole ? ? He grew annoyed and at the same time surprised at that emotion . He was conscious of a growing sense of absurdity . Hillman had written it all out , hadn't he ? ? Wasn't the report official enough ? ? What did he hope to accomplish here ? ? Hillman had ordered him not to leave the far bank . Prompted by a guilty urge , he had disobeyed the order of a man he respected . For what ? ? To tell John something he would find out for himself . The figure in the corner belched loudly , a deep , liquid eruption . Watson snorted and then laughed aloud . Exactly ! ! The soldier's voice was muffled again , stricken with chagrin . He clutched the staff , and his dark eyes blinked apologetically . -- 'scuse me , sir . -- Let's get out of here . Watson ran up the ladder and stood for a second sucking in the cool air that smelled of mud and river weeds . To his left , the two skiffs dented their sharp bows into the soft bank . The flat-bottomed boat swung slowly to the pull of the current . A soldier held the end of a frayed rope . Three Union guards appeared , carrying their rifles at ready . Watson stared at them curiously . They were stocky men , well fed and clean-shaven , with neat uniforms and sturdy boots . Behind them shambled a long column of weak , tattered men . The thin gray figures raised a hoarse , cawing cry like the call of a bird flock . They moved toward the skiffs with shocking eagerness , elbowing and shoving . Four men were knocked down , but did not attempt to rise . They crept down the muddy slope toward the waiting boats . The Union soldiers grounded arms and settled into healthy , indifferent postures to watch the feeble boarding of the skiffs . The crawling men tried to rise and fell again . No one moved to them . Watson watched two of them flounder into the shallow water and listened to their voices beg shrilly . In a confused , soaked and stumbling shift of bodies and lifting arms , the two men were dragged into the same skiff . The third crawling man forced himself erect . He swayed like a drunkard , his arms milling in slow circles . He paced forward unsteadily , leaning too far back , his head tilted oddly . His steps were short and stiff , and , with his head thrown back , his progress was a supercilious strut . He appeared to be peering haughtily down his nose at the crowded and unclean vessel that would carry him to freedom . He stalked into the water and fell heavily over the side of the flat-bottomed barge , his weight nearly swamping the craft . Watson looked for the fourth man . He had reached the three passive guards ; ; he crept in an incertain manner , patting the ground before him . The guards did not look at him . The figure on the earth halted , seemingly bewildered . He sank back on his thin haunches like a weary hound . Then he began to crawl again . Watson watched the creeping figure . He felt a spectator interest . Would the man make it or not ? ? If only there was a clock for him to crawl against . If he failed to reach the riverbank in five minutes , say , then the skiffs would pull away and leave him groping in the mud . Say three minutes to make it sporting . Still the guards did not move , but stood inert , aloof from the slow-scrambling man . The figure halted , and Watson gasped . The man began to creep in the wrong direction , deceived by a slight rise in the ground ! ! He turned slowly and began to crawl back up the bank toward the rampart . Watson raced for him , his boots slamming the soft earth . The guards came to life with astonishing menace . They spun and flung their rifles up . Watson gesticulated wildly . One man dropped to his knee for better aim . -- Let me help him , for the love of God ! ! The guards lowered their rifles and their rifles and peered at Watson with sullen , puzzled faces . Watson pounded to the crawling man and stopped , panting heavily . He reached down and closed his fingers on the man's upper arm . Beneath his clutch , a flat strip of muscle surged on the bone . Watson bent awkwardly and lifted the man to his feet . Watson stared into a cadaverous face . Two clotted balls the color of mucus rolled between fiery lids . Light sticks of fingers , the tips gummy with dark earth , patted at Watson's throat . The man's voice was a sweet , patient whisper . -- Henry said that he'd take my arm and get me right there . But you ain't Henry . -- no . -- It don't matter . Is it far ? ? How far could it be , Watson thought bleakly , how far can a blind man crawl ? ? Another body length or all the rest of his nighted life ? ? -- Not far . -- You talk deep . Not like us fellas . It raises the voice , bein in camp . You Secesh ? ? -- yes . Come on , now . Can you walk ? ? -- Why , course I can . I can walk real good . Watson stumbled down the bank . The man leaned his frail body against Watson's shoulder . He was no heavier than a child . Watson paused for breath . The man wheezed weakly , his fetid breath beating softly against Watson's neck . His sweet whisper came after great effort . -- Oh , Christ . I wish you was Henry . He promised to take me . -- hush . We're almost there . Watson supported the man to the edge of the bank and passed the frail figure over the bow of the nearest skiff . The man swayed on a thwart , turning his ruined eyes from side to side . Watson turned away , sickened for the first time in many months . He heard the patient voice calling . -- Henry ? ? Where are you , Henry ? ? -- Make him lie down ! ! Watson snatched a deep breath . He had not meant to shout . He stood with his back to the skiff . The men mewed and scratched , begging to be taken away . Watson spoke bewilderedly to the dark night flecked with pine-knot torches . -- Goddamn you ! ! What do you do to them ? ? Intelligence jabbed at him accusingly . He was angry , sickened . He had not felt that during the afternoon . No , nor later . All his emotions had been inward , self-conscious . In war , on a night like this , it was only the outward emotions that mattered , what could be flung out into the darkness to damage others . Yes . That was it . He was sure of it . John's type of man allowed this sort of thing to happen . What a fool he had been to think of his brother ! ! So Charles was dead . What did it matter ? ? His name had been crossed off a list . Already his cool body lay in the ground . What words had any meaning ? ? What had he thought of , to go to John , grovel and beg understanding ? ? To confess with a canvas chair as a prie-dieu , gouging at his heart until a rough and stupid hand bade him rise and go ? ? Men were slaughtered every day , tumbled into eternity like so many torn parcels flung down a portable chute . What made him think John had a right to witness his brother's humiliation ? ? What right had John to any special consideration ? ? Was John better , more deserving ? ? To hell with John . Let him chafe with impatience to see Charles , rip open the note with trembling hands and read the formal report in Hillman's beautiful , schoolmaster's hand . John would curse . He believed that brave boys didn't cry . Watson spat on the ground . He was grimly satisfied . He had stupidly thought himself compelled to ease his brother's pain . Now he knew perfectly that he had but longed to increase his own suffering . I would not want to be one of those writers who begin each morning by exclaiming , `` O Gogol , O Chekhov , O Thackeray and Dickens , what would you have made of a bomb shelter ornamented with four plaster-of-Paris ducks , a birdbath , and three composition gnomes with long beards and red mobcaps '' ? ? As I say , I wouldn't want to begin a day like this , but I often wonder what the dead would have done . But the shelter is as much a part of my landscape as the beech and horse-chestnut trees that grow on the ridge . I can see it from this window where I write . It was built by the Pasterns , and stands on the acre of ground that adjoins our property . It bulks under a veil of thin , new grass , like some embarrassing fact of physicalness , and I think Mrs. Pastern set out the statuary to soften its meaning . It would have been like her . She was a pale woman . Sitting on her terrace , sitting in her parlor , sitting anywhere , she ground an axe of self-esteem . Offer her a cup of tea and she would say , `` Why , these cups look just like a set I gave to the Salvation Army last year '' . Show her the new swimming pool and she would say , slapping her ankle , `` I suppose this must be where you breed your gigantic mosquitoes '' . Hand her a chair and she would say , `` Why , it's a nice imitation of those Queen Anne chairs I inherited from Grandmother Delancy '' . These trumps were more touching than they were anything else , and seemed to imply that the nights were long , her children ungrateful , and her marriage bewilderingly threadbare . Twenty years ago , she would have been known as a golf widow , and the sum of her manner was perhaps one of bereavement . She usually wore weeds , and a stranger watching her board a train might have guessed that Mr. Pastern was dead , but Mr. Pastern was far from dead . He was marching up and down the locker room of the Grassy Brae Golf Club shouting , `` Bomb Cuba ! ! Bomb Berlin ! ! Let's throw a little nuclear hardware at them and show them who's boss '' . He was brigadier of the club's locker-room light infantry , and at one time or another declared war on Russia , Czechoslovakia , Yugoslavia , and China . It all began on an autumn afternoon -- and who , after all these centuries , can describe the fineness of an autumn day ? ? One might pretend never to have seen one before , or , to more purpose , that there would never be another like it . The clear and searching sweep of sun on the lawns was like a climax of the year's lights . Leaves were burning somewhere and the smoke smelled , for all its ammoniac acidity , of beginnings . The boundless blue air was stretched over the zenith like the skin of a drum . Leaving her house one late afternoon , Mrs. Pastern stopped to admire the October light . It was the day to canvass for infectious hepatitis . Mrs. Pastern had been given sixteen names , a bundle of literature , and a printed book of receipts . It was her work to go among her neighbors and collect their checks . Her house stood on a rise of ground , and before she got into her car she looked at the houses below . Charity as she knew it was complex and reciprocal , and almost every roof she saw signified charity . Mrs. Balcolm worked for the brain . Mrs. Ten Eyke did mental health . Mrs. Trenchard worked for the blind . Mrs. Horowitz was in charge of diseases of the nose and throat . Mrs. Trempler was tuberculosis , Mrs. Surcliffe was Mothers' March of Dimes , Mrs. Craven was cancer , and Mrs. Gilkson did the kidney . Mrs. Hewlitt led the birthcontrol league , Mrs. Ryerson was arthritis , and way in the distance could be seen the slate roof of Ethel Littleton's house , a roof that signified gout . Mrs. Pastern undertook the work of going from house to house with the thoughtless resignation of an honest and traditional laborer . It was her destiny ; ; it was her life . Her mother had done it before her , and even her old grandmother , who had collected money for smallpox and unwed mothers . Mrs. Pastern had telephoned most of her neighbors in advance , and most of them were ready for her . She experienced none of the suspense of some poor stranger selling encyclopedias . Here and there she stayed to visit and drink a glass of sherry . The contributions were ahead of what she had got the previous year , and while the money , of course , was not hers , it excited her to stuff her kit with big checks . She stopped at the Surcliffes' after dusk , and had a Scotch-and-soda . She stayed too late , and when she left , it was dark and time to go home and cook supper for her husband . `` I got a hundred and sixty dollars for the hepatitis fund '' , she said excitedly when he walked in . `` I did everybody on my list but the Blevins and the Flannagans . I want to get my kit in tomorrow morning -- would you mind doing them while I cook the dinner '' ? ? `` But I don't know the Flannagans '' , Charlie Pastern said . `` Nobody does , but they gave me ten last year '' . He was tired , he had his business worries , and the sight of his wife arranging pork chops in the broiler only seemed like an extension of a boring day . He was happy enough to take the convertible and race up the hill to the Blevins' , thinking that they might give him a drink . But the Blevins were away ; ; their maid gave him an envelope with a check in it and shut the door . Turning in at the Flannagans' driveway , he tried to remember if he had ever met them . The name encouraged him , because he always felt that he could handle the Irish . There was a glass pane in the front door , and through this he could see into a hallway where a plump woman with red hair was arranging flowers . `` Infectious hepatitis '' , he shouted heartily . She took a good look at herself in the mirror before she turned and , walking with very small steps , started toward the door . `` Oh , please come in '' , she said . The girlish voice was nearly a whisper . She was not a girl , he could see . Her hair was dyed , and her bloom was fading , and she must have been crowding forty , but she seemed to be one of those women who cling to the manners and graces of a pretty child of eight . `` Your wife just called '' , she said , separating one word from another , exactly like a child . `` And I am not sure that I have any cash -- any money , that is -- but if you will wait just a minute I will write you out a check if I can find my checkbook . Won't you step into the living room , where it's cozier '' ? ? A fire had just been lighted , he saw , and things had been set out for drinks , and , like any stray , his response to these comforts was instantaneous . Where was Mr. Flannagan , he wondered . Travelling home on a late train ? ? Changing his clothes upstairs ? ? Taking a shower ? ? At the end of the room there was a desk heaped with papers , and she began to riffle these , making sighs and and noises of girlish exasperation . `` I am terribly sorry to keep you waiting '' , she said , `` but won't you make yourself a little drink while you wait ? ? Everything's on the table '' . `` What train does Mr. Flannagan come out on '' ? ? `` Mr. Flannagan is away '' , she said . Her voice dropped . `` Mr. Flannagan has been away for six weeks . '' `` I'll have a drink , then , if you'll have one with me '' . `` If you will promise to make it weak '' . `` Sit down '' , he said , `` and enjoy your drink and look for your checkbook later . The only way to find things is to relax '' . All in all , they had six drinks . She described herself and her circumstances unhesitatingly . Mr. Flannagan manufactured plastic tongue depressors . He travelled all over the world . She didn't like to travel . Planes made her feel faint , and in Tokyo , where she had gone that summer , she had been given raw fish for breakfast and so she had come straight home . She and her husband had formerly lived in New York , where she had many friends , but Mr. Flannagan thought the country would be safer in case of war . She would rather live in danger than die of loneliness and boredom . She had no children ; ; she had made no friends . `` I've seen you , though , before '' , she said with enormous coyness , patting his knee . `` I've seen you walking your dogs on Sunday and driving by in the convertible . '' The thought of this lonely woman sitting at her window touched him , although he was even more touched by her plumpness . Sheer plumpness , he knew , is not a vital part of the body and has no procreative functions . It serves merely as an excess cushion for the rest of the carcass . And knowing its humble place in the scale of things , why did he , at this time of life , seem almost ready to sell his soul for plumpness ? ? The remarks she made about the sufferings of a lonely woman seemed so broad at first that he didn't know what to make of them , but after the sixth drink he put his arm around her and suggested that they go upstairs and look for her checkbook there . `` I've never done this before '' , she said later , when he was arranging himself to leave . Her voice shook with feeling , and he thought it lovely . He didn't doubt her truthfulness , although he had heard the words a hundred times . `` I've never done this before '' , they always said , shaking their dresses down over their white shoulders . `` I've never done this before '' , they always said , waiting for the elevator in the hotel corridor . `` I've never done this before '' , they always said , pouring another whiskey . `` I've never done this before '' , they always said , putting on their stockings . On ships at sea , on railroad trains , in summer hotels with mountain views , they always said , `` I've never done this before '' . `` Where have you been '' ? ? Mrs. Pastern asked sadly , when he came in . `` It's after eleven '' . `` I had a drink with the Flannagans '' . `` She told me he was in Germany '' . `` He came home unexpectedly '' . Charlie ate some supper in the kitchen and went into the TV room to hear the news . `` Bomb them '' ! ! He shouted . `` Throw a little nuclear hardware at them ! ! Show them who's boss '' ! ! But in bed he had trouble sleeping . He thought first of his son and daughter , away at college . He loved them . It was the only meaning of the word that he had ever known . Then he played nine imaginary holes of golf , choosing his handicap , his irons , his stance , his opponents , and his weather in detail , but the green of the links seemed faded in the light of his business worries . His money was tied up in a Nassau hotel , an Ohio pottery works , and a detergent for window-washing , and luck had been running against him . His worries harried him up out of bed , and he lighted a cigarette and went to the window . In the starlight he could see the trees stripped of their leaves . During the summer he had tried to repair some of his losses at the track , and the bare trees reminded him that his pari-mutuel tickets would still be lying , like leaves , in the gutters near Belmont and Saratoga . Maple and ash , beech and elm , one hundred to win on Three in the fourth , fifty to win on Six in the third , one hundred to win on Two in the eighth . Children walking home from school would scuff through what seemed to be his foliage . Then , getting back into bed , he thought unashamedly of Mrs. Flannagan , planning where they would next meet and what they would do . There are , he thought , so few true means of forgetfulness in this life that why should he shun the medicine even when the medicine seemed , as it did , a little crude ? ? It was not as though she noted clearly that her nephews had not been to see her for ten years , not since their last journey eastward to witness their Uncle Izaak being lowered into the rocky soil ; ; that aside from due notification of certain major events in their lives ( two marriages , two births , one divorce ) , Christmas and Easter cards of the traditional sort had been the only thin link she had with them through the widowed years . Her thoughts were not discrete . But there was a look about her mouth as though she were tasting lemons . She grasped the chair arms and brought her thin body upright , like a bird alert for flight . She turned and walked stiffly into the parlor to the dainty-legged escritoire , warped and cracked now from fifty years in an atmosphere of sea spray . There she extracted two limp vellum sheets and wrote off the letters , one to Abel , one to Mark . Once her trembling hand , with the pen grasped tight in it , was pressed against the paper the words came sharply , smoothly , as authoritatively as they would dropping from her own lips . And the stiffly regal look of them , she saw grimly , lacked the quaver of age which , thwarting the efforts of her amazing will , ran through her spoken words like a thin ragged string . `` Please come down as soon as you conveniently can '' , the upright letters stalked from the broad-nibbed pen , `` I have an important matter to discuss with you '' . To Abel : `` I am afraid there is not much to amuse small children here . I should be obliged if you could make other arrangements for your daughters . You may stay as long as you wish , of course , but if arranging for the care of the girls must take time into account , I think a day or two should be enough to finish our business in '' . To Mark : `` Please give my regards to Myra '' . She signed the letters quickly , stamped them , and placed them on the hall table for Raphael to mail in town . Then she went back to the wicker chair and resolutely adjusted her eyes to the glare on the water . `` My nephews will be coming down '' , she said that evening as Angelina brought her dinner into the dining room , the whole meal on a vast linen-covered tray . She looked at the girl speculatively from eyes which had paled with the years ; ; from the early evening lights of them which had first startled Izaak to look at her in an uncousinly way , they had faded to a near-absence of color which had , possibly from her constant looking at the water , something of the light of the sea in them . Angelina placed the tray on the table and with a flick of dark wrist drew off the cloth . She smiled , and the teeth gleamed in her beautifully modeled olive face . `` That will be so nice for you , Mrs. Packard '' , she said . Her voice was ripe and full and her teeth flashed again in Sicilian brilliance before the warm curved lips met and her mouth settled in repose . `` Um '' , said the old lady , and brought her eyes down to the tray . `` You remember them , I suppose '' ? ? She glinted suspiciously at the dish before her : `` blowfish . I hope Raphael bought them whole '' . Angelina stepped back , her eyes roaming the tray for omissions . Then she looked at the old woman again , her eyes calm . `` Yes '' , she said , `` I remember that they came here every summer . I used to play with the older one sometimes , when he'd let me . Abel '' ? ? The name fell with lazy affectionate remembrance from her lips . For an instant the old aunt felt something indefinable flash through her smile . She would have said triumph . Then Angelina turned and with an easy grace walked toward the kitchen . Jessica Packard lifted her head and followed the retreating figure , her eyes resting nearly closed on the unself-conscious rise and fall of the rounded hips . For a moment she held her face to the empty doorway ; ; then she snorted and groped for her fork . There's no greater catastrophe in the universe , she reflected dourly , impaling tender green beans on the silver fork , than the dwindling away of a family . Procreation , expansion , proliferation -- these are the laws of living things , with the penalty for not obeying them the ultimate in punishments : oblivion . When the fate of the individual is visited on the group , then ( the warm sweet butter dripped from her raised trembling fork and she pushed her head forward belligerently ) , ah , then the true bitterness of existence could be tasted . And indeed the young garden beans were brackish in her mouth . She was the last living of the older generation . What had once been a widespread family -- at one time , she knew , there were enough Packards to populate an entire county -- had now narrowed down to the two boys , Abel and Mark . She swung her eyes up to the blue of the window , her jaws gently mashing the bitter beans . What hope lay in the nephews , she asked the intensifying light out there , with one married to a barren woman and the other divorced , having sired two girl children , with none to bear on the Packard name ? ? She ate . It seemed to her , as it seemed each night , that the gloom drew itself in and became densest at the table's empty chairs , giving her the frequent illusion that she dined with shadows . Here , too , she talked low , quirking her head at one or another of the places , most often at Izaak's armchair which faced her across the long table . Or it might have been the absent nephews she addressed , consciously playing with the notion that this was one of the summers of their early years . She thought again of her children , those two who had died young , before the later science which might have saved them could attach even a label to their separate malignancies . The girl , her first , she barely remembered . It could have been anyone's infant , for it had not survived the bassinet . But the boy the boy had been alive yesterday . Each successive movement in his growing was recorded on the unreeling film inside her . He ran on his plump sticks of legs , freezing now and again into the sudden startled attitudes which the camera had caught and held on the paling photographs , all carefully placed and glued and labeled , resting in the fat plush album in the bottom drawer of the escritoire . In the cruel clearness of her memory the boy remained unchanged , quick with the delight of laughter , and the pain with which she recalled that short destroyed childhood was still unendurable to her . It was one with the desolate rocks and the alien water on those days when she hated the sea . The brothers drove down together in Mark's small red sports car , Mark at the wheel . They rarely spoke . Abel sat and regarded the farm country which , spreading out from both sides of the road , rolled greenly up to where the silent white houses and long barns and silos nested into the tilled fields . He saw the land with a stranger's eyes , all the old familiarness gone . And it presented itself to him as it would to any stranger , impervious , complete in itself . There was stability there , too -- a color which his life had had once . That is what childhood is , he told himself . Solid , settled lost . In the stiff neutral lines of the telephone poles he saw the no-nonsense pen strokes of Aunt Jessica's letter . What bad grace , what incredible selfishness he and Mark had shown . The boyhood summers preceding their uncle's funeral might never have been . They had closed over , absolutely , with the sealing of old Izaak's grave . The small car flew on relentlessly . The old woman , stubbornly reigning in the house above the crashing waters took on an ominous reality . Abel moved and adjusted his long legs . `` I suppose it has to do with the property '' , Mark had said over the telephone when they had discussed their receipt of the letters . Not until the words had been spoken did Abel suddenly see the old house and the insistent sea , and feel his contrition blotted out in one shameful moment of covetousness . He and Mark were the last of the family , and there lay the Cape Ann property which had seemed to have no end , stretching from horizon to horizon , in those golden days of summer . Now Abel turned his head to look at his brother . Mark held the wheel loosely , but his fingers curved around it in a purposeful way and the deliberate set of his body spoke plainly of the figure he'd make in the years to come . His sandy hair was already beginning to thin and recede at the sides , and Abel looked quickly away . Mark easily looked years older than himself , settled , his world comfortably categorized . The vacation traffic was becoming heavier as they approached the sea . `` She didn't mention bringing Myra '' , Mark said , maneuvering the car into the next lane . `` She's probably getting old -- crotchety , I mean -- and we figured uh-uh , better not . They've never met , you know . But Myra wouldn't budge without an express invitation . I feel kind of bad about it '' . He gave Abel a quick glance and moved closer to the wheel , hugging it to him , and Abel caught this briefest of allusions to guilt . `` I imagine the old girl hasn't missed us much '' , Mark added , his eyes on the road . Abel ignored the half-expressed bid for confirmation . He smiled . It was barely possible that his brother was right . He could tell they were approaching the sea . The air took on a special strength now that they'd left the fecund warmth of the farmland behind . There was the smell of the coast , like a primeval memory , composed of equal parts salt water , clams , seaweed and northern air . He turned from the flying trees to look ahead and saw with an inward boy's eye again the great fieldstone house which , built on one of the many acres of ancestral land bordering the west harbor , had been Izaak's bride-gift to his cousin-wife as the last century ended . Mark's thoughts must have been keeping silent pace beside his own , climbing the same crags in dirty white sneakers , clambering out on top of the headland and coming upon the sudden glinting water at the same instant . `` Remember the Starbird ? ? '' Mark asked , and Abel lifted his eyes from the double lines in the middle of the road , the twin white ribbons which the car swallowed rapidly as it ascended the crest of the hill and came down . `` The Starbird , '' Abel said . There was the day Uncle Izaak had , in an unexpected grandiose gesture , handed over the pretty sloop to Abel for keeps , on condition that he never fail to let his brother accompany him whenever younger the boy wished . The two of them had developed into a remarkable sailing team all of this happening in a time of their lives when their youth and their brotherhood knitted them together as no other time or circumstance could . They seemed then to have had a single mind and body , a mutuality which had been accepted with the fact of their youth , casually . He saw the Starbird as she lay , her slender mast up and gently turning , its point describing constant languid circles against a cumulus sky . Both of them had known the feeling of the small life in her waiting , ready , for the two of them to run up her sails . The Starbird had been long at the bottom of the bay . They came unexpectedly upon the sea . Meeting it without preparation as they did , robbed of anticipation , a common disappointment seized them . They were climbing the hill in the night when the headlights abruptly probed solid blackness , became two parallel luminous tubes which broadened out into a faint mist of light and ended . Mark stopped the car and switched off the lights and they sat looking at the water , which , there being no moon out , at first could be distinguished from the sky only by an absence of stars . His eyes were old and they never saw well , but heated with whisky they'd glare at my noise , growing red and raising up his rage . I decided I hated the Pedersen kid too , dying in our kitchen while I was away where I couldn't watch , dying just to entertain Hans and making me go up snapping steps and down a drafty hall , Pa lumped under the covers at the end like dung covered with snow , snoring and whistling . Oh he'd not care about the Pedersen kid . He'd not care about getting waked so he could give up some of his whisky to a slit of a kid and maybe lose one of his hiding places in the bargain . That would make him mad enough if he was sober . I didn't hurry though it was cold and the Pedersen kid was in the kitchen . He was all shoveled up like I thought he'd be . I pushed at his shoulder , calling his name . I think his name stopped the snoring but he didn't move except to roll a little when I shoved him . The covers slid down his skinny neck so I saw his head , fuzzed like a dandelion gone to seed , but his face was turned to the wall -- there was the pale shadow of his nose on the plaster -- and I thought , Well you don't look much like a pig-drunk bully now . I couldn't be sure he was still asleep . He was a cagey sonofabitch . I shook him a little harder and made some noise . `` Pap-pap-pap-hey '' , I said . I was leaning too far over . I knew better . He always slept close to the wall so you had to lean to reach him . Oh he was smart . It put you off . I knew better but I was thinking of the Pedersen kid mother-naked in all that dough . When his arm came up I ducked away but it caught me on the side of the neck , watering my eyes , and I backed off to cough . Pa was on his side , looking at me , his eyes winking , the hand that had hit me a fist in the pillow . `` Get the hell out of here '' . I didn't say anything , trying to get my throat clear , but I watched him . He was like a mean horse to come at from the rear . It was better , though , he'd hit me . He was bitter when he missed . `` Get the hell out of here '' . `` Big Hans sent me . He told me to wake you '' . `` A fat hell on Big Hans . Get out of here '' . `` He found the Pedersen kid by the crib '' . `` Get the hell out '' . Pa pulled at the covers . He was tasting his mouth . `` The kid's froze good . Hans is rubbing him with snow . He's got him in the kitchen '' . `` Pedersen '' ? ? `` No , Pa . It's the Pedersen kid . The kid '' . `` Nothing to steal from the crib '' . `` Not stealing , Pa . He was just lying there . Hans found him froze . That's where he was when Hans found him '' . Pa laughed . `` I ain't hid nothing in the crib '' . `` You don't understand , Pa . The Pedersen kid . The kid '' -- `` I goddamn well understand '' . Pa had his head up , glaring , his teeth gnawing at the place where he'd grown a mustache once . `` I goddamn well understand . You know I don't want to see Pedersen . That cock . Why should I ? ? What did he come for , hey ? ? God dammit , get . And don't come back . Find out something . You're a fool . Both you and Hans . Pedersen . That cock . Don't come back . Out . Out '' . He was shouting and breathing hard and closing his fist on the pillow . He had long black hairs on his wrist . They curled around the cuff of his nightshirt . `` Big Hans made me come . Big Hans said '' -- `` A fat hell on Big Hans . He's an even bigger fool than you are . Fat , hey ? ? I taught him , dammit , and I'll teach you . Out . You want me to drop my pot '' ? ? He was about to get up so I got out , slamming the door . He was beginning to see he was too mad to sleep . Then he threw things . Once he went after Hans and dumped his pot over the banister . Pa'd been shit-sick in that pot . Hans got an axe . He didn't even bother to wipe himself off and he chopped part of Pa's door down before he stopped . He might not have gone that far if Pa hadn't been locked in laughing fit to shake the house . That pot put Pa in an awful good humor whenever he thought of it . I always felt the memory was present in both of them , stirring in their chests like a laugh or a growl , as eager as an animal to be out . I heard Pa cursing all the way downstairs . Hans had laid steaming towels over the kid's chest and stomach . He was rubbing snow on the kid's legs and feet . Water from the snow and water from the towels had run off the kid to the table where the dough was , and the dough was turning pasty , sticking to the kid's back and behind . `` Ain't he going to wake up '' ? ? `` What about your pa '' ? ? `` He was awake when I left '' . `` What'd he say ? ? Did you get the whisky '' ? ? `` He said a fat hell on Big Hans '' . `` Don't be smart . Did you ask him about the whisky '' ? ? `` Yeah '' . `` Well '' ? ? `` He said a fat hell on Big Hans '' . `` Don't be smart . What's he going to do '' ? ? `` Go back to sleep most likely '' . `` You'd best get that whisky '' . `` You go . Take the axe . Pa's scared to hell of axes '' . `` Listen to me , Jorge , I've had enough to your sassing . This kid's froze bad . If I don't get some whisky down him he might die . You want the kid to die ? ? Do you ? ? Well , get your pa and get that whisky '' . `` Pa don't care about the kid '' . `` Jorge '' . `` Well he don't . He don't care at all , and I don't care to get my head busted neither . He don't care , and I don't care to have his shit flung on me . He don't care about anybody . All he cares about is his whisky and that dry crack in his face . Get pig-drunk -- that's what he wants . He don't care about nothing else at all . Nothing . Not Pedersen's kid neither . That cock . Not the kid neither '' . `` I'll get the spirits '' , Ma said . I'd wound Big Hans up tight . I was ready to jump but when Ma said she'd get the whisky it surprised him like it surprised me , and he ran down . Ma never went near the old man when he was sleeping it off . Not any more . Not for years . The first thing every morning when she washed her face she could see the scar on her chin where he'd cut her with a boot cleat , and maybe she saw him heaving it again , the dirty sock popping out as it flew . It should have been nearly as easy for her to remember that as it was for Big Hans to remember going after the axe while he was still spattered with Pa's yellow sick insides . `` No you won't '' , Big Hans said . `` Yes , Hans , if they're needed '' , Ma said . Hans shook his head but neither of us tried to stop her . If we had , then one of us would have had to go instead . Hans rubbed the kid with more snow rubbed rubbed . `` I'll get more snow '' , I said . I took the pail and shovel and went out on the porch . I don't know where Ma went . I thought she'd gone upstairs and expected to hear she had . She had surprised Hans like she had surprised me when she said she'd go , and then she surprised him again when she came back so quick like she must have , because when I came in with the snow she was there with a bottle with three white feathers on its label and Hans was holding it angrily by the throat . Oh , he was being queer and careful , pawing about in the drawer and holding the bottle like a snake at the length of his arm . He was awful angry because he'd thought Ma was going to do something big , something heroic even , especially for her I know him I know him we felt the same sometimes while Ma wasn't thinking about that at all , not anything like that . There was no way of getting even . It wasn't like getting cheated at the fair . They were always trying so you got to expect it . Now Hans had given Ma something of his -- we both had when we thought she was going straight to Pa -- something valuable ; ; but since she didn't know we'd given it to her , there was no easy way of getting it back . Hans cut the foil off finally and unscrewed the cap . He was put out too because there was only one way of understanding what she'd done . Ma had found one of Pa's hiding places . She'd found one and she hadn't said a word while Big Hans and I had hunted and hunted as we always did all winter , every winter since the spring that Hans had come and I had looked in the privy and found the first one . Pa had a knack for hiding . He knew we were looking and he enjoyed it . But now Ma . She'd found it by luck most likely but she hadn't said anything and we didn't know how long ago it'd been or how many other ones she'd found , saying nothing . Pa was sure to find out . Sometimes he didn't seem to because he hid them so well he couldn't find them himself or because he looked and didn't find anything and figured he hadn't hid one after all or had drunk it up . But he'd find out about this one because we were using it . A fool could see what was going on . If he found out Ma found it -- that'd be bad . He took pride in his hiding . It was all the pride he had . I guess fooling Hans and me took doing . But he didn't figure Ma for much . He didn't figure her at all , and if he found out a woman it'd be bad . Hans poured some in a tumbler . `` You going to put more towels on him '' ? ? `` No '' . `` Why not ? ? That's what he needs , something warm to his skin , don't he '' ? ? `` Not where he's froze good . Heat's bad for frostbite . That's why I only put towels on his chest and belly . He's got to thaw slow . You ought to know that '' . Colors on the towels had run . Ma poked her toe in the kid's clothes . `` What are we going to do with these '' ? ? Big Hans began pouring whisky in the kid's mouth but his mouth filled without any getting down his throat and in a second it was dripping from his chin . `` Here , help me prop him up . I got hold his mouth open '' . I didn't want to touch him and I hoped Ma would do it but she kept looking at the kid's clothes piled on the floor and the pool of water by them and didn't make any move to . `` Come on , Jorge '' . `` All right '' . `` Lift , don't shove lift '' . `` O.K. , I'm lifting '' . I took him by the shoulders . His head flopped back . His mouth fell open . The skin on his neck was tight . He was cold all right . `` Hold his head up . He'll choke '' . `` His mouth is open '' . `` His throat's shut . He'll choke '' . `` He'll choke anyway '' . `` Hold his head up '' . `` I can't '' . `` Don't hold him like that . Put your arms around him '' . `` Well Jesus '' . He was cold all right . I put my arm carefully around him . Hans had his fingers in the kid's mouth . `` Now he'll choke for sure '' . `` Shut up . Just hold him like I told you '' . He was cold all right , and wet . I had my arm behind his back . He was in his mid-fifties at this time , long past the establishment of his name and the wish to be lionized yet once again , and it was almost a decade since he had sworn off lecturing . There was never a doubt any more how his structures would be received ; ; it was always the same unqualified success now . He could no longer build anything , whether a private residence in his Pennsylvania county or a church in Brazil , without it being obvious that he had done it , and while here and there he was taken to task for again developing the same airy technique , they were such fanciful and sometimes even playful buildings that the public felt assured by its sense of recognition after a time , a quality of authentic uniqueness about them , which , once established by an artist as his private vision , is no longer disputable as to its other values . Stowey Rummel was internationally famous , a crafter of a genuine Americana in foreign eyes , an original designer whose inventive childishness with steel and concrete was made even more believably sincere by his personality . He had lived for almost thirty years in this same stone farmhouse with the same wife , a remarkably childish thing in itself ; ; he rose at half-past six every morning , made himself some French coffee , had his corn flakes and more coffee , smoked four cigarettes while reading last Sunday's Herald Tribune and yesterday's Pittsburgh Gazette , then put on his high-topped farmer's shoes and walked under a vine bower to his workshop . This was an enormously long building whose walls were made of rocks , some of them brought home from every continent during his six years as an oil geologist . The debris of his other careers was piled everywhere ; ; a pile of wire cages for mice from his time as a geneticist and a microscope lying on its side on the window sill , vertical steel columns wired for support to the open ceiling beams with spidery steel cantilevers jutting out into the air , masonry constructions on the floor from the time he was inventing his disastrous fireplace whose smoke would pass through a whole house , visible all the way up through wire gratings on each floor . His files , desk , drafting board and a high stool formed the only clean island in the chaos . Everywhere else his ideas lay or hung in visible form : his models , drawings , ten-foot canvases in monochromes from his painting days , and underfoot a windfall of broken-backed books that looked as though their insides had been ransacked by a maniac . Bicycle gear-sets he had once used as the basis of the design for the Camden Cycly Company plant hung on a rope in one corner , and over his desk , next to several old and dusty hats , was a clean pair of roller skates which he occasionally used up and down in front of his house . He worked standing , with his left hand in his pocket as though he were merely stopping for a moment , sketching with the surprised stare of one who was watching another person's hand . Sometimes he would grunt softly to some invisible onlooker beside him , sometimes he would look stern and moralistic as his pencil did what he disapproved . It all seemed -- if one could have peeked in at him through one of his windows -- as though this broken-nosed man with the muscular arms and wrestler's neck was merely the caretaker trying his hand at the boss's work . This air of disengagement carried over to his apparent attitude toward his things , and people often mistook it for boredom in him or a surrender to repetitious routine . But he was not bored at all ; ; he had found his style quite early in his career and he thought it quite wonderful that the world admired it , and he could not imagine why he should alter it . There are , after all , fortunate souls who hear everything , but only know how to listen to what is good for them , and Stowey was , as things go , a fortunate man . He left his home the day after New Year's wearing a mackinaw and sheepskin mittens and without a hat . He would wear this same costume in Florida , despite his wife Cleota's reminders over the past five days that he must take some cool clothes with him . But he was too busy to hear what she was saying . So they parted when she was in an impatient humor . When he was bent over behind the wheel of the station wagon , feeling in his trouser cuffs for the ignition key which he had dropped a moment before , she came out of the house with an enormous Rumanian shawl over her head , which she had bought in that country during one of their trips abroad , and handed him a clean handkerchief through the window . Finding the key under his shoe , he started the engine , and while it warmed up he turned to her standing there in the dripping fog , and said , `` Defrost the refrigerator '' . He saw the surprise in her face , and laughed as though it were the funniest expression he had ever seen . He kept on laughing until she started laughing with him . He had a deep voice which was full of good food she had cooked , and good humor ; ; an explosive laugh which always carried everything before it . He would settle himself into his seat to laugh . Whenever he laughed it was all he was doing . And she was made to fall in love with him again there in the rutted dirt driveway standing in the cold fog , mad as she was at his going away when he really didn't have to , mad at their both having got older in a life that seemed to have taken no more than a week to go by . She was forty-nine at this time , a lanky woman of breeding with an austere , narrow face which had the distinction of a steeple or some architecture that had been designed long ago for a stubborn sort of prayer . Her eyebrows were definite and heavy and formed two lines moving upward toward a high forehead and a great head of brown hair that fell to her shoulders . There was an air of blindness in her gray eyes , the startled-horse look that ultimately comes to some women who are born at the end of an ancestral line long since divorced from money-making and which , besides , has kept its estate intact . She was personally sloppy , and when she had colds would blow her nose in the same handkerchief all day and keep it , soaking wet , dangling from her waist , and when she gardened she would eat dinner with dirt on her calves . But just when she seemed to have sunk into some depravity of peasanthood she would disappear and come down bathed , brushed , and taking breaths of air , and even with her broken nails her hands would come to rest on a table or a leaf with a thoughtless delicacy , a grace of history , so to speak , and for an instant one saw how ferociously proud she was and adamant on certain questions of personal value . She even spoke differently when she was clean , and she was clean now for his departure and her voice clear and rather sharp . `` Now drive carefully , for God's sake '' ! ! She called , trying to attain a half humorous resentment at his departure . But he did not notice , and was already backing the car down to the road , saying `` Toot-toot '' ! ! To the stump of a tree as he passed it , the same stump which had impaled the car of many a guest in the past thirty years and which he refused to have removed . She stood clutching her shawl around her shoulders until he had swung the car onto the road . Then , when he had it pointed down the hill , he stopped to gaze at her through the window . She had begun to turn back toward the house , but his look caught her and she stood still , waiting there for what his expression indicated would be a serious word of farewell . He looked at her out of himself , she thought , as he did only for an instant at a time , the look which always surprised her even now when his uncombable hair was yellowing a little and his breath came hard through his nicotine-choked lungs , the look of the gaunt youth she had suddenly found herself staring at in the Tate Gallery on a Thursday once . Now she kept herself protectively ready to laugh again and sure enough he pointed at her with his index finger and said `` Toot '' ! ! Once more and roared off into the fog , his foot evidently surprising him with the suddenness with which it pressed the accelerator , just as his hand did when he worked . She walked back to the house and entered , feeling herself returning , sensing some kind of opportunity in the empty building . There is a death in all partings , she knew , and promptly put it out of her mind . She enjoyed great parties when she would sit up talking and dancing and drinking all night , but it always seemed to her that being alone , especially alone in her house , was the realest part of life . Now she could let out the three parakeets without fear they would be stepped on or that Stowey would let them out one of the doors ; ; she could dust the plants , then break off suddenly and pick up an old novel and read from the middle on ; ; improvise cha-chas on the harp ; ; and finally , the best part of all , simply sit at the plank table in the kitchen with a bottle of wine and the newspapers , reading the ads as well as the news , registering nothing on her mind but letting her soul suspend itself above all wishing and desire . She did this now , comfortably aware of the mist running down the windows , of the silence outside , of the dark afternoon it was getting to be . She fell asleep leaning on her hand , hearing the house creaking as though it were a living a private life of its own these two hundred years , hearing the birds rustling in their cages and the occasional whirring of wings as one of them landed on the table and walked across the newspaper to perch in the crook of her arm . Every few minutes she would awaken for a moment to review things : Stowey , yes , was on his way south , and the two boys were away in school , and nothing was burning on the stove , and Lucretia was coming for dinner and bringing three guests of hers . Then she fell asleep again as soddenly as a person with fever , and when she awoke it was dark outside and the clarity was back in her eyes . She stood up , smoothing her hair down , straightening her clothes , feeling a thankfulness for the enveloping darkness outside , and , above everything else , for the absence of the need to answer , to respond , to be aware even of Stowey coming in or going out , and yet , now that she was beginning to cook , she glimpsed a future without him , a future alone like this , and the pain made her head writhe , and in a moment she found it hard to wait for Lucretia to come with her guests . She went into the living room and turned on three lamps , then back into the kitchen where she turned on the ceiling light and the switch that lit the floods on the barn , illuminating the driveway . She knew she was feeling afraid and inwardly laughed at herself . They were both so young , after all , so unready for any final parting . How could it have been thirty years already , she wondered ? ? But yes , nineteen plus thirty was forty-nine , and she was forty-nine and she had been married at nineteen . She stood still over the leg of lamb , rubbing herbs into it , quite suddenly conscious of a nausea in her stomach and a feeling of wrath , a sensation of violence that started her shivering . But they all said , `` No , your time will come . Enjoy being a bride while you can '' . There was no room for company in the tiny Weaning House ( where the Albright boys always took their brides , till they could get a house and a farm of their own ) . So when the Big House filled up and ran over , the sisters-in-law found beds for everyone in their own homes . And there was still not anything that Linda Kay could do . So Linda Kay gave up asking , and accepted her reprieve . Without saying so , she was really grateful ; ; for to attend the dying was something she had never experienced , and certainly had not imagined when she thought of the duties she would have as Bobby Joe's wife . She had made curtains for all the windows of her little house , and she had kept it spotless and neat , shabby as it was , and cooked good meals for Bobby Joe . She had done all the things she had promised herself she would do , but she had not thought of this . People died , she would have said , in hospitals , or in cars on the highway at night . Bobby Joe was gone all day now , not coming in for dinner and sometimes not for supper . When they first married he had been working in the fields all day , and she would get in the car and drive to wherever he was working , to take him a fresh hot meal . Now there was no work in the fields , nor would there be till it rained , and she did not know where he went . Not that she complained , or had any cause to . Four or five of the cousins from East Texas were about his age , so naturally they ran around together . There was no reason for her to ask what they did . Thus a new pattern of days began to develop , for Granny Albright did not die . She lay still on the bed , her head hardly denting the pillow ; ; sometimes she opened her eyes and looked around , and sometimes she took a little milk or soup . They stopped expecting her to die the next minute , but only in the next day or two . Those who had driven hundreds of miles for the burial would not go home , for she might die any time ; ; but they might as well unpack their suitcases , for she might linger on . So the pattern was established . When Linda Kay had put up her breakfast dishes and mopped her linoleum rugs , she would go to the Big House . There was not anything she could do there , but that was where everyone was , or would be . Bobby Joe and the boys would come by , say `` How's Granny '' ? ? And sit on the porch a while . The older men would be there at noon , and maybe rest for a time before they took their guns off to the creek or drove down the road towards town . The women and children stayed at the Albrights' . The women , keeping their voices low as they worked around the house or sat in the living room , sounded like chickens shut up in a coop for the night . The children had to play away from the house ( in the barn loft or the pasture behind the barn ) , to maintain a proper quietness . Off and on , all day , someone would be wiping at the powdery gray dust that settled over everything . The evaporative cooler had been moved to Granny's room , and her door was kept shut ; ; so that the rest of the house stayed open , though there was a question as to whether it was hotter or cooler that way . The dust clogged their throats , and the heat parched them , so that the women were always making ice water . They had cleaned up an old ice box and begun to buy fifty-pound blocks of ice in town , as the electric refrigerator came nowhere near providing enough ice for the crowds who ate and drank there . One afternoon , as the women sat clucking softly , a new carload of people pulled up at the gate . It was a Cadillac , black grayed with the dust of the road , its windows closed tight so you knew that the people who climbed out of it would be cool and unwrinkled . They were an old fat couple ( as Linda Kay described them to herself ) , a thick middle-aged man , and a girl about ten or twelve . There was much embracing , much exclaiming . `` Cousin Ada ! ! Cousin John '' ! ! `` Cousin Lura '' ! ! `` Cousin Howard '' ! ! `` And how is she '' ? ? `` About the same , John , about the same '' . All the women got up and offered their chairs , and when they were all seated again , the guests made their inquiries and their explanations . `` We were on our vacation in Canada '' , Howard explained , in a muffled voice that must have been used to booming , `` and the news didn't catch up with us till we were nearly home . We came on as soon as we could '' . There was the suggestion of ice water , and -- in spite of the protest `` We're not really thirsty '' -- Linda Kay , to escape the stuffy air and the smothering soft voices , hurried to the kitchen . She filled a big pitcher and set it , with glasses , on a tray . Carrying it to the living room , she imagined the picture she made : tall and roundly slim , a bit sophisticated in her yellow sheath , with a graceful swingy walk that she had learned as a twirler with the school band . Almost immediately she was ashamed of herself for feeling vain , at such a time , in such a place , and she tossed back her long yellow hair , smiling shyly as she entered the room . Howard ( the thick middle-aged man ) was looking at her . She felt the look and looked back because she could not help it , seeing that he was neither as old nor as thick as she had at first believed . `` And who is this '' ? ? He asked , when she passed him a glass . `` Oh that's Linda Kay '' , Mama Albright said fondly . `` She married our baby boy , Bobby Joe , this summer '' . `` Let's see '' , Cousin Ada said . `` He's a right smart younger than the rest '' ? ? `` Oh yes '' , Mama laughed . `` He's ten years younger than Ernest . We didn't expect him to come along ; ; thought for the longest he was a tumor '' . This joke was not funny to Linda Kay , and she blushed , as she always did ; ; then , hearing the muffled boom of Howard's laughter , blushed redder . `` Who is Howard , anyway '' ? ? She asked Bobby Joe that night . `` He makes me uncomfortable '' . `` Oh he's a second cousin or something . He got in the oil business out at Odessa and lucked into some money '' . `` How old is he '' ? ? `` Gosh , I don't know . Thirty-five , I guess . He's been married and got this half-grown kid . If he bothers you , don't pay him any mind . He's just a big windbag '' . Bobby Joe was thinking about something else . `` Say , did you know they're fixing to have a two-day antelope season on the Double J '' ? ? He was talking about antelope again when they woke up . `` Listen , I never had a chance to kill an antelope . There never was a season before , but now they want to thin 'em out on account of the drouth '' . `` Did he ever visit here when he was a kid '' ? ? Linda Kay asked . `` Who '' ? ? `` Howard '' . `` Hell , I don't know . When he was a kid I wasn't around '' . Bobby Joe took a gun from behind the door , and with a quick `` Bye now '' was gone for the day . Almost immediately Howard and his daughter Debora drove up in the Cadillac . `` We're going after ice '' , Howard said , `` and thought maybe you'd go along and keep us company '' . There was really no reason to refuse , and Linda Kay had never ridden in a Cadillac . Driving along the caliche-topped road to town , Howard talked . Finally he said , `` Tell me about yourself '' , and Linda Kay told him , because she thought herself that she had had an interesting life . She was such a well-rounded teenager , having been a twirler , Future Farmers sweetheart , and secretary of Future Homemakers . In her sophomore year she had started going steady with Bobby Joe , who was a football player , Future Homemakers sweetheart , and president of Future Farmers . It was easy to see that they were made for each other , and they knew what they wanted . Bobby Joe would be a senior this year , and he planned to graduate . But there was no need for Linda Kay to go on , since all she wanted in life was to make a home for Bobby Joe and ( blushing ) raise his children . Howard sighed . `` You lucky kids '' , he said . `` I'd give anything if I could have found a girl like you '' . Then he told Linda Kay about himself . Of course he couldn't say much , really , because of Debora , but Linda Kay could imagine what kind of woman his wife had been and what a raw deal he had got . It made her feel different about Howard . She was going to tell Bobby Joe about how mistaken she had been , but he brought one of the cousins home for supper , and all they did was talk about antelope . Bobby Joe was trying to get Linda Kay to say she would cook one if he brought it home . `` Cook a whole antelope '' ? ? She exclaimed . `` Why , I couldn't even cook a piece of antelope steak ; ; I never even saw any '' . `` Oh , you could . I want to roast the whole thing , and have it for the boys '' . Linda Kay told him he couldn't do anything like that with his Grandma dying , and he said well they had to eat , didn't they , they weren't all dying . Linda Kay felt like going off to the bedroom to cry ; ; but they were going up to the Big House after supper , and she had to put on a clean dress and fix her hair a little . Every night they all went to Mama and Papa Albright's , and sat on the open front porch , where they could get the breeze . It was full-of-the-moon ( or a little past ) , and nearly light as day . They all sat around and drank ice water , and the men smoked , and everybody had a good time . Once in a while they said what a shame it was , with Granny dying , but they all agreed she wouldn't have wanted it any other way . That night the older men got to talking about going possum-hunting on a moonlight night . Bobby Joe and two or three of the other boys declared they had never been possum-hunting , and Uncle Bill Farnworth ( from Mama Albright's side of the family ) said he would just get up from there and take them , right then . After they had left , some of the people moved around , to find more comfortable places to sit . There were not many chairs , so that some preferred to sit on the edge of the porch , resting their feet on the ground , and others liked to sit where they could lean back against the wall . Howard , who had been sitting against the wall , said he needed more fresh air , and took the spot on the edge of the porch where Bobby Joe had been sitting . `` You'll be a darn sight more comfortable there , Howard '' , Ernest said , laughing , and they all laughed . Linda Kay felt that she was not exactly more comfortable . Bobby Joe had been sitting close to her , touching her actually , and holding her hand from time to time , but it seemed at once that Howard sat much closer . Perhaps it was just that he had so much more flesh , so that more of it seemed to come in contact with hers ; ; but she had never been so aware of anyone's flesh before . Still she was not sorry he sat by her , but in fact was flattered . He had become the center of the company , such stories he had to tell . He had sold oil stock to Bob Hope and Bing Crosby in person ; ; he had helped fight an oil-well fire that raged six days and nights . `` But tell me , doctor , where do you plan to conduct the hatching '' ? ? Alex asked . `` That will have to be in the hotel '' , the doctor retorted , confirming Alex's anticipations . `` What I want you to do is to go to the market with me early tomorrow morning and help smuggle the hen back into the hotel '' . The doctor paid the bill and they repaired to the hotel , room number nine , to initiate Alex further into these undertakings . The doctor opened the smallest of his cases , an unimposing straw bag , and exposed the contents for Alex's inspection . Inside , carefully packed in straw , were six eggs , but the eye of a poultry psychologist was required to detect what scientifically valuable specimentalia lay inside ; ; to Alex they were merely six not unusual hens' eggs . There was little enough time to contemplate them , however ; ; in an instant the doctor was stalking across the room with an antique ledger in his hands , thoroughly eared and big as a table top . He placed it on Alex's lap . `` This is my hen ledger '' , he informed him in an absorbed way . `` It's been going since 1908 when I was a junior in college . That first entry there is the Vermont Flumenophobe , the earliest and one of the most successful of my eighty-three varieties -- great big scapulars and hardly any primaries at all . Couldn't take them near a river , though , or they'd squawk like a turkey cock the day before Thanksgiving '' . The ledger was full of most precise information : date of laying , length of incubation period , number of chick reaching the first week , second week , fifth week , weight of hen , size of rooster's wattles and so on , all scrawled out in a hand that looked more Chinese than English , the most jagged and sprawling Alex had ever seen . Below these particulars was a series of alpha-beta-gammas connected by arrows and crosses which denoted the lineage of the breed . Alex's instruction was rapid , for the doctor had to go off to the Rue Ecole De Medecine to hear more speeches with only time for one sip of wine to sustain him through them all . But after the doctor's return that night Alex could see , from the high window in his own room , the now familiar figure crouched on a truly impressive heap of towels , apparently giving its egg-hatching powers one final chance before it was replaced in its office by a sure-enough hen . A knocking at Alex's door roused him at six o'clock the following morning . It was the doctor , dressed and ready for the expedition to the market , and Alex was obliged to prepare himself in haste . The doctor stood about , waiting for Alex to dress , with a show of impatience , and soon they were moving , as quietly as could be , through the still-dark hallways , past the bedroom of the patronne , and so into the street . The market was not far and , once there , the doctor's sense of immediacy left him and he fell into a state of harmony with the birds around him . He stroked the hens and they responded with delighted clucks , he gobbled with the turkeys and they at once were all attention , he quacked with the ducks , and cackled with a pair of exceedingly flattered geese . The dawn progressed and it seemed that the doctor would never be done with his ministrations when quite abruptly something broke his revery . It was a fine broody hen , white , with a maternal eye and a striking abundance of feathers in the under region of the abdomen . The doctor , with the air of a man whose professional interests have found scope , drew Alex's attention to those excellences which might otherwise have escaped him : the fine color in comb and wattles , the length and quality of neck and saddle hackles , the firm , wide spread of the toes , and a rare justness in the formation of the ear lappets . All search was ended ; ; he had found his fowl . The purchase was effected and they made their way towards the hotel again , the hen , with whom some sort of communication had been set up , nestling in the doctor's arms . The clocks struck seven-thirty as they approached the hotel entrance ; ; and hopes that the chambermaid and patronne would still be abed began to rise in Alex's well exercised breast . The doctor was wearing a long New England greatcoat , hardly necessary in the June weather but a garment which proved well adapted to the sequestration of hens . Alex entered first and was followed by the doctor who , for all his care , manifested a perceptible bulge on his left side where the hen was cradled . They advanced in a line across the entrance hall to the stairway and up , with gingerly steps , towards the first landing . It was then that they heard the tread of one descending and , in some perturbation glancing up , saw the patronne coming towards them as they gained the landing . `` Bonjour , messieurs , vous etes matinals '' , she greeted them pleasantly . Alex explained that they had been out for a stroll before breakfast while the doctor edged around behind him , attempting to hide the protuberance at his left side behind Alex's arm and back . `` Vous voulez vos petits dejeuners tout de suite alors '' ? ? Their hostess enquired . Alex told her that there was no hurry for their breakfasts , trying at the same time to effect a speedy separation of the persons before and behind him . The doctor , he noticed , was attempting a transverse movement towards the stairs , but before the movement could be completed a distinct and audible cluck ruffled the air in the hollow of the stair-well . Eyes swerved in the patronne's head , Alex coughed loudly , and the doctor , with a sforzando of chicken noises floating behind him , took to the stairs in long-shanked leaps . `` Comment '' ? ? Ejaculated the surprised woman , looking at Alex for an explanation but he , parting from her without ceremony , only offered a few words about the doctor's provincial American speech and a state of nerves brought on by the demands of his work . With that he hurried up the stairs , followed by her suspicious gaze . When Alex entered his room , the doctor was already preparing a nest in the straw case , six eggs ready for the hen's attentions . There was no reference to the incident on the stairs , his powers being absorbed by this more immediate business . The hen appeared to have no doubts as to her duties and was quick to settle down to the performance of them . One part of her audience was totally engaged , the connoisseur witnessing a peculiarly fine performance of some ancient classic , the other part , the guest of the connoisseur , attentive as one who must take an intelligent interest in that which he does not fully understand . The spectacle progressed towards a denouement which was obviously still remote ; ; the audience attended . Time elapsed but the doctor was obviously unconscious of its passage until an unwelcome knock on the door interrupted the processes of nature . Startled , he jumped up to pull hen and case out of view , and Alex went to the door . He opened it a crack and in doing so made as much shuffling , coughing , and scraping noise as possible in order to drown emanations from the hen who had begun to protest . It was Giselle , the fille de chambre , come to clean the room , and while she stood before him with ears pricked up and regard all curiosity , explaining her errand , Alex could see from the corner of his eye the doctor doing all he could to calm the displeased bird . Giselle was reluctant but Alex succeeded in persuading her to come back in five minutes and the door was shut again . `` Who was that , young feller '' ? ? The doctor instantly asked . `` That was the fille de chambre , the one you thought couldn't get the eggs out . She looked mighty interested , though . Anyhow she's coming back in five minutes to do the room '' . The doctor's mind was working at a great speed ; ; he rose to put his greatcoat on and addressed Alex in a muted voice . `` Have you got our keys handy '' ? ? `` Right in my pocket '' . `` All right . Now you go outside and beckon me when it's safe '' . The hall was empty and Alex beckoned ; ; they climbed the stairs which creaked , very loudly to their sensitive ears , and reached the next floor . A guest was locking his room ; ; they passed behind him and got to Alex's room unnoticed . The doctor sat down rather wearily , caressing the hen and remarking that the city was not the place for a poultry-loving man , but no sooner was the remark out than a knock at this door obliged him to cover the hen with his greatcoat once more . At the door Alex managed to persuade the increasingly astonished fille de chambre to return in ten minutes . It was evident that a second transfer had to be effected , and that it had to take place between the time the fille finished the doctor's room and the time she began Alex's . They waited three minutes and then crept out on tip-toe ; ; the halls were empty and they passed down the stairs to number nine and listened at the door . A bustle of sheets being smoothed and pillows being arranged indicated the fille de chambre's presence inside ; ; they listened and suddenly a step towards the door announced another important fact . The doctor shot down to the lavatory and turned the doorknob , but to no effect : the lavatory was occupied . Although a look of alarm passed over his face , he did not arrest his movements but disappeared into the shower room just as the chambermaid emerged from number nine . Alex suppressed those expressions of relief which offered to prevail in his face and escape from his throat ; ; unwarranted they were in any case for , as he stood facing the fille de chambre , his ears were assailed by new sounds from the interior of the shower room . The events of the last quarter of an hour , mysterious to any bird accustomed only to the predictable life of coop and barnyard , had overcome the doctor's hen and she gave out a series of cackly wails , perhaps mourning her nest , but briefly enjoyed . The doctor's wits had not left him , however , for all his sixty-eight years , and the wails were almost immediately lost in the sound of water rushing out from the showerhead . Alex nodded to the maid as though nothing unusual were taking place and entered the doctor's room . Shortly , the doctor himself entered , his hair somewhat wet from the shower , but evidently satisfied with the outcome of their adventures . Without comment he opened the closet and from its shelves constructed a highboard around the egg case which he had placed on the floor inside . Next , the hen was nested and all seemed well . The two men sat for some time , savoring the pleasure of escape from peril and the relief such escape brings , before they got up and left the hotel , the doctor to go to the conference house and Alex to go to the main post office . Alex returned to the hotel , rather weary and with no new prospects of a role , in the late afternoon , but found the doctor in an ebullient mood . At the time Alex arrived he was engaged in some sort of intimate communication with the hen , who had settled herself on the nest most peacefully after the occurrences of the morning . `` Chickens have short memories '' , the doctor remarked , `` that's why they are better company than most people I know '' , and he went on to break some important news to Alex . `` Well '' , he began , `` It seems like some people in Paris want to hear more from me than those fellers over at the conference house do . They've got a big vulture from Tanganika at the zoo here , with a wife for him , too , very rare birds , both of them , the only Vulturidae of their species outside Africa . Seems like she's willing , but the male just flops around all day like the bashful boy who took Jeannie May behind the barn and then didn't know what to do , and the people at the zoo haven't got any vulture chicks to show for their trouble . Going downstairs with the tray , Winston wished he could have given in to Miss Ada , but he knew better than to do what she said when she had that little-girl look . There were times it wasn't right to make a person happy , like the times she came in the kitchen and asked know we don't keep peanut `` butter for a peanut butter sandwich . You in this house '' , he always told her . `` Why , Winston '' , she'd cry , `` I just now saw you eating it out of the jar '' ! ! But he knew how important it was for her to keep her figure . In the kitchen , Leona , his little young wife , was reading the morning paper . Her legs hung down long and thin as she sat on the high stool . `` Here '' , Winston said gently , `` what's these dishes doing not washed '' ? ? The enormous plates which had held Mr. Jack's four fried eggs and five strips of bacon were still stacked in the sink . `` Leave me alone '' , Leona said . `` Can't you see I'm busy '' ? ? She looked at him impudently over the corner of the paper . `` This is moving day '' , Winston reminded her , `` and I bet you left things every which way upstairs , your clothes all over the floor and the bed not made . Leona '' ! ! His eye had fastened on her leg ; ; bending , he touched her knee . `` If I catch you one more time down here without stockings '' -- She twitched her leg away . `` Fuss , fuss , old man '' . She had an alley cat's manners . Winston stacked Miss Ada's thin pink dishes in the sink . Then he spread out the last list on the counter . `` To Be Left Behind '' was printed at the top in Miss Ada ; ; fine hand . Winston took out a pencil , admired the point , and wrote slowly and heavily , `` Clothes Stand '' . Sighing , Leona dropped the paper and stood up . `` I guess I better get ready to go '' . Winston watched her fumbling to untie her apron . `` Here '' . Carefully , he undid the bow . `` How come your bows is always cockeyed '' ? ? She turned and put her arms around his neck . `` I don't want to leave here , Winston '' . `` Now listen to that '' . He drew back , embarrassed and pleased . `` I thought you was sick to death of this big house . Said you wore yourself out , cleaning all these empty rooms '' . `` At least there is room here '' , she said . `` What room is there going to be in an apartment for any child '' ? ? `` I told you what Miss Ada's doctor said '' . `` I don't mean Miss Ada ! ! What you think I care about that ? ? I mean our children '' . She sounded as though they already existed . In spite of the hundred things he had on his mind , Winston went and put his arm around her waist . `` We've got plenty of time to think about that . All the time in the world . We've only been married four years , January '' . `` Four years '' ! ! She wailed . `` That's a long time , waiting '' . `` How many times have I told you '' -- he began , and was almost glad when she cut him off -- `` Too many times '' ! ! -- and flounced to the sink , where she began noisily to wash her hands . Too many times was the truth of it , Winston thought . He hardly believed his reason himself any more . Although it had seemed a good reason , to begin with : no couple could afford to have children . `` How you going to work with a child hanging on you '' ? ? He asked Leona . `` You want to keep this job , don't you '' ? ? He doubted whether she heard him , over the running water . He sat for a while with his hands on his knees , watching the bend of her back as she gathered up her things -- a comb , a bottle of aspirin -- to take upstairs and pack . She made him sad some days , and he was never sure why ; ; it was something to do with her back , the thinness of it , and the quick , jerky way she bent . She was too young , that was all ; ; too young and thin and straight . `` Winston '' ! ! It was Mr. Jack , bellowing out in the hall . Winston hurried through the swinging door . `` I've been bursting my lungs for you '' , Mr. Jack complained . He was standing in front of the mirror , tightening his tie . He had on his gray tweed overcoat and his city hat , and his brief case lay on the bench . `` I don't know what you think you've been doing about my clothes '' , he said . `` This coat looks like a rag heap '' . There were a few blades of lint on the shoulder . Winston took the clothesbrush out of the closet and went to work . He gave Mr. Jack a real going-over ; ; he brushed his shoulders and his back and his collar with long , firm strokes . `` Hey '' ! ! Mr. Jack cried when the brush tipped his hat down over his eyes . Winston apologized and quickly set the hat right . Then he stood back to look at Mr. Jack , who was pulling on his pigskin gloves . Winston enjoyed seeing him start out ; ; he wore his clothes with style . When he was going to town , nothing was good enough -- he had cursed at Winston once for leaving a fleck of polish on his shoelace . At home , he wouldn't even wash his hands for supper , and he wandered around the yard in a pair of sweaty old corduroys . The velvet smoking jackets , pearl-gray , wine , and blue , which Miss Ada had bought him hung brushed and unworn in the closet . `` Good-by , Winston '' , Mr. Jack said , giving a final set to his hat . `` Look out for those movers '' ! ! Winston watched him hurry down the drive to his car ; ; a handsome , fine-looking man it made him proud to see . After Mr. Jack drove away , Winston went on looking out the window . He noticed a speck of dirt on the sill and swiped at it with his finger . Then he looked at his finger , at the wrinkled , heavy knuckle and the thick nail he used like a knife to pry up , slit , and open . For the first time , he be sad about the move . That house was ten years off his life let himself . Each brass handle and hinge shone for his reward , and he knew how to get at the dust in the china flowers and how to take down the long glass drops which hung from the chandelier . He knew the house like a blind man , through his fingers , and he did not like to think of all the time and rags and polishes he had spent on keeping it up . Ten years ago , he had come to the house to be interviewed . The tulips and the big pink peonies had been blooming along the drive , and he had walked up from the bus almost singing . Miss Ada had been out back , in a straw hat , planting flowers . She had talked to him right there , with the hot sun in his face , which made him sweat and feel ashamed . Winston had been surprised at her for that . Still , he had liked the way she had looked , in a fresh , neat cotton dress -- citron yellow , if he remembered . She had had a dignity about her , even barefoot and almost too tan . Since then , the flowers she had planted had spread all over the hill . Already the jonquils were blooming in a flock by the front gate , and the periwinkles were coming on , blue by the porch steps . In a week the hyacinths would spike out . And the dogwood in early May , for Miss Ada's alfresco party ; ; and after that the Japanese cherries . Now the yard looked wet and bald , the trees bare under their buds , but in a while Miss Ada's flowers would bloom like a marching parade . She had dug a hole for each bulb , each tree wore a tag with her writing on it ; ; where would she go for her gardening now ? ? Somehow Winston didn't think she'd take to window boxes . Sighing , he hurried to the living room . He had a thousand things to see to . Still , he couldn't help thinking , we're all getting old , getting small ; ; the snail is pulling in her horns . In the living room , Miss Ada was standing by the window with a sheaf of lists in her hand . She was looking out at the garden . `` Winston '' , she said , `` get the basket for the breakables '' . Winston had the big straw basket ready in the hall . He brought it in and put it down beside her . Miss Ada was looking fine ; ; she had on her Easter suit , blue , with lavender binding . Halfway across the house , he could have smelled her morning perfume . It hung in all her day clothes , sweet and strong ; ; sometimes when he was pressing , Winston raised her dresses to his face . Frowning , Miss Ada studied the list . `` Well , let's see . The china lemon tree . The alabaster cockatoo '' . Winston followed her around the room , collecting the small frail objects ( Christmas , birthday , and anniversary ) and wrapping them in tissue paper . Neither of them trusted the movers . When they came to Mr. Jack's photograph , twenty by twelve inches in a curly silver frame , Miss Ada said , `` By rights I ought to leave that , seeing he won't take my clotheshorse '' . She smiled at Winston , and he saw the hateful hard glitter in her eyes . He picked up the photograph and began to wrap it . `` At least you could leave it for the movers '' , Miss Ada said . `` What possessed you to tell me a clotheshorse would be a good idea '' ? ? Winston folded the tissue paper carefully . `` He's used it every day ; ; every morning , I lay out his clothes on it '' . `` Well , that's over now . And it was his main present ! ! Leave that fool picture out '' , she added sharply . Winston laid it in the basket . `` Mr. Jack sets store by that '' . `` Really , Winston . It was meant to be my present '' . But she went on down the list . Winston was relieved ; ; those presents had been on his mind . He had only agreed with Miss Ada about getting the valet , but he had actually suggested the photograph to Mr. Jack . `` You know what she likes , Winston '' , he had said wearily , one evening in November when Winston was pulling off his overshoes . `` Tell me what to get her for Christmas '' . `` She's been talking about a picture '' , Winston had told him . `` Picture ! ! You mean picture of me '' ? ? But Winston had persuaded him . On Christmas night , they had had a disagreement about it . Winston had heard because he was setting up the liquor tray in the next room . Through the door , he had seen Mr. Jack walking around , waiting for Miss Ada . Finally she had come down ; ; Winston had heard her shaking out the skirt of her new pink silk hostess gown . `` How do you like it '' ? ? She had asked . Mr. Jack had said , `` You look about fifteen years old '' . `` Is that a compliment '' ? ? `` I don't know '' . He had stood at a little distance , studying her , as though he would walk around next and look at the back of her head . `` Lovie , you make me feel naked '' . Miss Ada had giggled , and she went sweeping and rustling to the couch and sank down . `` You look like that picture I have at the office '' , Mr. Jack had started . `` Not a line , not a wrinkle . I look like an old man , compared '' , and he had picked up his photograph with the red Christmas bow still on it . `` Look , an old man . Will you wear pink when you're sixty '' ? ? `` Darling , I love that photograph . I'm going to put it on my dresser '' . `` I guess it's children make a woman old . A man gets old anyhow '' . After a minute he went on , `` People must think the curse is on me , seeing you fresh as an apple and me old and gray '' . `` I'll give you a medical certificate , framed , if you like '' , Miss Ada had said . `` No . All I want is a picture -- with a few lines . Make the man put them in if he has to '' . After that they had sat for five minutes without saying a word . Then Miss Ada had stood up , rustling and rustling , and gone upstairs . Was it love ? ? I had no doubt that it was . During the rest of the summer my scholarly mania for making plaster casts and spatter prints of Catskill flowers and leaves was all but surpassed by the constantly renewed impressions of Jessica that my mind served up to me for contemplation and delight . Nothing in all the preceding years had had the power to bring me closer to a knowledge of profound sorrow than the breakup of camp , the packing away of my camp uniforms , the severing of ties with the six or ten people I had grown most to love in the world . In final separation from them , in the railroad terminal across the river from New York , I would nearly cry . My parents' welcoming arms would seem woeful , inadequate , unwanted . But that year was different , for just as the city , in the form of my street clothes , had intruded upon my mountain nights , so an essential part of the summer gave promise of continuing into the fall : Jessica and I , about to be separated not by a mere footbridge or messhall kitchen but by the immense obstacle of residing in cruelly distant boroughs , had agreed to correspond . These letters became the center of my existence . I lived to see an envelope of hers in the morning mail and to lock myself in my room in the afternoon to reread her letter for the tenth time and finally prepare an answer . My memory has catalogued for easy reference and withdrawal the image of her pink , scented stationery and the unsloped , almost printed configurations of her neat , studious handwriting with which she invited me to recall our summer , so many sentences beginning with `` Remember when ; ; '' and others concerning camp friends who resided in her suburban neighborhood , , and news of her commencing again her piano lessons , her private school , a visit to Boston to see her grandparents and an uncle who was a surgeon returned on furlough , wounded , from the war in Europe . In my letters I took on a personality that differed from the self I knew in real life . Then epistolatory me was a foreign correspondent dispatching exciting cables and communiques , full of dash and wit and glamor , quoting from the books I read , imitating the grand styles of the authors recommended by a teacher in whose special , after-school class I was enrolled . The letters took their source from a stream of my imagination in which I was transformed into a young man not unlike my bunkmate Eliot Sands -- he of the porch steps anecdotes -- who smoked cigarettes , performed the tango , wore fifty dollar suits , and sneaked off into the dark with girls to do unimaginable things with them . Like Eliot , in my fantasies , I had a proud bearing and , with a skill that was vaguely continental , I would lead Jessica through an evening of dancing and handsome descriptions of my newest exploits , would guide her gently to the night's climax which , in my dreams , was always represented by our almost suffocating one another to death with deep , moist kisses burning with love . The night after reading her letter about her surgeon uncle -- it must have been late in September -- I had a vision of myself returned in ragged uniform from The Front , nearly dying , my head bandaged and blooded , and Jessica bending over me , the power of her love bringing me back to life . For many nights afterward , the idea of her having been so close to me in that imagined bed would return and fill me with obscure and painful desires , would cause me to lie awake in shame , tossing with irresolution , longing to fall into a deep sleep . The weeks went by , and the longer our separation grew , the more unbounded and almost unbearable my fantasies became . They caused my love for Jessica to become warmer and at the same time more hopeless , as if my adolescent self knew that only torment would ever bring me the courage to ask to see her again . As it turned out , Jessica took matters into her own hands . Having received permission to give a camp reunion-Halloween party , she asked that I come and be her date . I went and , mum and nervous , all but made a fool of myself . Again among those jubilantly reunited bunkmates , I was shy with Jessie and acted as I had during those early Saturday mornings when we all seemed to be playing for effect , to be detached and unconcerned with the girls who were properly our dates but about whom , later , in the privacy of our bunks , we would think in terms of the most elaborate romance . I remember standing in a corner , watching Jessica act the hostess , serving soft drinks to her guests . She was wearing her dark hair in two , thick braids to attain an `` American Girl '' effect she thought was appropriate to Halloween . It made her look sweet and schoolgirlish , I was excited to be with her , but I did not know how to express it . Yet a moment did come that night when the adventurous letter writer and fantasist seemed to stride off my flashy pages , out of my mind , and plant himself in reality . It was late , we were playing kissing games , and Jessica and I were called on to kiss in front of the others . We blushed and were flustered , and it turned out to be the fleetest brush of lips upon cheek . The kiss outraged our friends but it was done and meanwhile had released in me all the remote , exciting premonitions of lust , all the mysterious sensations that I had imagined a truly consummated kiss would convey to me . It was at that party that , finally overcoming my timidity , inspired by tales only half-understood and overheard among older boys , I asked Jessie to spend New Year's Eve with me . Lovingly , she accepted , and so great was my emotion that all I could think of saying was , `` You're amazing , you know '' ? ? Later , we agreed to think of how we wished to spend that night . We would write to one another and make a definite plan . She was terribly pleased . Among my school and neighborhood friends , during the next months , I bragged and swaggered and pompously described my impending date . But though I boasted and gave off a dapper front , I was beneath it all frightened . It would be the first time I had ever been completely alone with a girl I loved . I had no idea of what subjects one discussed when alone with a girl , or how one behaved : Should I hold her hand while walking or only when crossing the street ? ? Should I bring along a corsage or send one to her ? ? Was it preferable to meet her at home or in the city ? ? Should I accompany her to the door of her home , or should I ask to be invited in ? ? In or out , should I kiss her goodnight ? ? All this was unknown to me , and yet I had dared to ask her out for the most important night of the year ! ! When in one letter Jessica informed me that her father did not like the idea of her going out alone on New Year's Eve , I knew for a moment an immense relief ; ; but the letter went on : she had cried , she had implored , she had been miserable at his refusal , and finally he had relented -- and now how happy she was , how expectant ! ! Her optimism gave me heart . I forced confidence into myself . I made inquiries , I read a book of etiquette . In December I wrote her with authority that we would meet on the steps of the Hotel Astor , a rendezvous spot that I had learned was the most sophisticated . We would attend a film and , later on , I stated , we might go to the Mayflower Coffee Shop or Child's or Toffenetti's for waffles . I set the hour of our meeting for seven . At five o'clock that night it was already dark , and behind my closed door I was dressing as carefully as a groom . I wore a new double-breasted brown worsted suit with a faint herringbone design and wide lapels like a devil's ears . My camp-made leather wallet , bulky with twisted , raised stitches around the edges , I stuffed with money I had been saving . Hatless , in an overcoat of rough blue wool , I was given a proud farewell by my mother and father , and I set out into the strangely still streets of Brooklyn . I felt superior to the neighborhood friends I was leaving behind , felt older than my years , and was full of compliments for myself as I headed into the subway that was carrying its packs of passengers out of that dull borough and into the unstable , tantalizing excitement of Manhattan . Times Square , when I ascended to it with my fellow subway travellers ( all dressed as if for a huge wedding in a family of which we were all distant members ) , was nearly impassable , the sidewalks swarming with celebrants , with bundled up sailors and soldiers already hugging their girls and their rationed bottles of whiskey . Heavy-coated , severe-looking policemen sat astride noble horses along the curbside to prevent the revellers from spilling out in front of the crawling traffic . The night was cold but the crowd kept one warm . The giant electric signs and marquees were lit up for the first time since blackout regulations had been instituted , and the atmosphere was alive with the feeling that victory was just around the corner . Cardboard noisemakers , substitutes for the unavailable tin models , were being hawked and bought at makeshift stands every few yards along Broadway , and one's ears were continually serenaded by the horns' rasps and bleats . An old gentlemen next to me held a Boy Scout bugle to his lips and blasted away at every fourth step and during the interim shouted out , `` V for Victory '' ! ! His neighbors cheered him on . There was a great sense of camaraderie . How did one join them ? ? Where were they all walking to ? ? Was I supposed to buy a funny hat and a rattle for Jessica ? ? It was a quarter of seven when the crowd washed me up among the other gallants who had established the Astor steps as the beach-head from which to launch their night of merrymaking . I looked over their faces and felt a twinge : they all looked so much more knowing than I . I looked away . I looked for Jessica to materialize out of the clogging , curdling crowd and , as the time passed and I waited , a fiend came to life beside me and whispered in my ear : How was I planning to greet Jessica ? ? Where exactly would we go after the movie ? ? Suppose the lines in front of the movie houses were too long and we couldn't get in ? ? Suppose I hadn't brought along enough money ? ? I felt for my wallet . Its thick , substantial outline calmed me . But when I saw that it was already ten past seven , I began to wonder if something had gone wrong . Suppose her father had changed his mind and had refused to let her leave ? ? Suppose at this very moment her father was calling my house in an effort to cancel the plans ? ? I grew uneasy . All about me there was a hectic interplay of meetings taking place , like abrupt , jerky scenes in old silent movies , joyous greetings and beginnings , huggings and kissings , enthusiastic forays into the festive night . Whole platoons were taking up new positions on the steps , arriving and departing , while I stayed glued , like a signpost , to one spot . At 7:25 two hotel doormen came thumping down the steps , carrying a saw-horse to be set up as a barricade in front of the haberdashery store window next to the entranceway , and as I watched them in their gaudy red coats that nearly scraped the ground , their golden , fringed epaulets and spic , red-visored caps , I suddenly saw just over their shoulders Jessica gracefully making her way through the crowd . My heart almost stopped beating . There were thirty-eight patients on the bus the morning I left for Hanover , most of them disturbed and hallucinating . An interne , a nurse and two attendants were in charge of us . I felt lonely and depressed as I stared out the bus window at Chicago's grim , dirty West Side . It seemed incredible , as I listened to the monotonous drone of voices and smelled the fetid odors coming from the patients , that technically I was a ward of the state of Illinois , going to a hospital for the mentally ill . I suddenly thought of Mary Jane Brennan , the way her pretty eyes could flash with anger , her quiet competence , the gentleness and sweetness that lay just beneath the surface of her defenses . We had become good friends during my stay at Cook County Hospital . I had told her enough about myself to offset somewhat the damaging stories that had appeared in local newspapers after my little adventure in Marshall Field & Co. . She knew that I lived at a good address on the Gold Coast , that I had once been a medical student and was thinking of returning to the university to finish my medical studies . She knew also that I was unmarried and without a single known relative . She wasn't quite sure that I felt enough remorse about my drinking , or that I would not return to it once I was out and on my own again . This had worried her . `` I read those newspaper stories about you '' , she had said . `` You must have loved that girl very much , but you couldn't have meant it when you said that you wanted to kill her '' . `` Why do you say that '' ? ? I asked . `` I was full of booze and , well , a drunk is apt to do anything he says he'll do '' . Nonsense ! ! I grew up in an Irish neighborhood on Chicago's West Side . Don't tell me about drunks . You're not the kind to go violent . Were you in love with that girl '' ? ? `` Would it make any difference to you if I were , Mary Jane '' ? ? She met my eyes , suddenly angry . `` I wouldn't have gone into nursing if I didn't care about people . I'm interested in every patient I've helped take care of . When I think of people like you , well , I '' -- `` You what , Mary Jane '' ? ? `` You are young , intelligent , have a whole lifetime before you to make something worth while of yourself , but you mess it up with whiskey , indifference , self-destructive attitudes . I don't blame that girl for breaking her engagement with you . Was she pretty '' ? ? `` Oh , yes '' , I said , feeling annoyed , `` she was very pretty . You don't believe that I'm going back to medical school and finish , do you '' ? ? `` Why should I ? ? I've worked this ward for three months now . We keep getting the same ones back again and again . They all mean well , have great promises to make when they are about to go home , but drinking is their sickness . You've not seemed like them , but maybe you are . You've treated your stay here like a big joke . It's not a joke to be sent to a place like this or to Hanover . I wanted to go to college , too '' -- `` Why didn't you '' ? ? I asked . `` Chicago has some of the best '' -- Her eyes flashed angrily . `` That's what I mean about you , Anderson '' , she said . `` You don't seem to know much about reality . I'll tell you why I didn't go to college ; ; I'm the oldest of six children . My father's a policeman and makes less than seven thousand dollars a year . There was no money for tuition , for clothes , for all the things you apparently take for granted . Nurses' training here doesn't cost anything . They even pay me six dollars a month . I think it's a good deal . I'm going to become a good nurse , and I've got two baby brothers that are going to have college if I have to work at my profession until I'm an old maid to give it to them '' . `` Do you have a boy friend '' ? ? I asked . `` That's none of your business '' , she said , then changed the subject . `` What about your father and mother , don't you think of them when you're in a place like this '' ? ? `` My father and mother died when I was two years old '' , I said . `` My aunt raised me . Aunt Mary died when I was doing my military service . I have no one but myself to worry about '' . Something in my voice must have touched her deeply because her anger passed quickly , and she turned away to keep me from seeing her face . `` I'm sorry '' , she said . `` I don't know what I'd do without my family . We've always been so close '' . `` Tell me more about them '' . Her eyes became bright as she talked about her father and mother , aunts and uncles , cousins . Listening , I felt cheated and lonely as only an orphan can . When she had finished I said : `` Your dad sounds like a good father and a good policeman . I'll bet he wouldn't be pleased if a rumdum like me were to ask his daughter for a date -- I mean , after I'm out of the hospital , a month or so from now '' . `` My father is a sergeant of detectives and has been attached to Homicide for five years . He's a pretty good judge of character , Anderson . I don't think he'd mind too much if he were sure you'd decided not to be a rumdum in the future '' . `` What about you ? ? How would you feel about it if I were to ask you for a date when I get through at Hanover '' ? ? `` If I thought you were serious about going back to school , that you'd learned something from your experiences here and at Hanover -- well , I might consider such an offer . What about your that girl you were going to kill '' ? ? It suddenly seemed very important to me that Mary Jane Brennan should know the truth about me -- that I was not the confused , sick , irresponsible person she believed me to be . `` There are things about me that I can't tell you now , Mary Jane '' , I said , `` but if you'll go out to dinner with me when I get out of Hanover , I'd like to tell you the whole story . I can say this : I'm dead serious about going back to school . As for that other girl , let's just say that I never want to see her again . You will get to come home on long weekends from Hanover , won't you '' ? ? `` Yes , I'll get one overnight a month '' . `` We'll go up to the Edgewater Beach Hotel for dinner '' , I said . `` Do you like to dance ? ? They always have a good orchestra '' . `` I like to dance '' , she said , then turned and walked away . There hadn't been anything really personal in her interest in me . I knew that . It was just that she felt deeply about every patient on the ward and wanted to believe that they might benefit from their treatment there . Now , riding this hospital bus , feeling isolated and utterly alone , I knew that she was genuine and unique , quite unlike any girl I had known before . It seemed the most important thing in my life at this moment that she should know the real truth about me . It was a fantastic story . Only two people in the state of Illinois knew that I was entering Hanover State Hospital under an assumed name , or why . It was unlikely that any girl as sharp as Mary Jane Brennan would believe it without proof . But I had the proof , all documented in a legal agreement which I would show her the moment I was free to do so . As the bus turned into the main highway and headed toward Hanover I settled back in my seat and closed my eyes , thinking over the events of the past two weeks , trying to put the pieces in order . I wondered suddenly as I listened to the disconnected jabberings coming from the patient behind me , if I had not perhaps imagined it all . Perhaps this was reality and Dale Nelson , the actor , was delusion ; ; a figment of Carl Anderson's imagination . Four I had come to Chicago from New York early in September with a dramatic production called Ask Tony . It was a bad play , real grade-A turkey , which only a prevalence of angels with grandiose dreams of capital gain and tax money to burn could have put into rehearsal . No one , not even the producer , had any real hope of getting it back to Broadway . But because it was a suspense gangster story of the Capone era , many of us felt that it might catch on for a run in Chicago , continue as a road company , and eventually become a movie . Such optimism was completely unjustified . The critics literally screamed their indignation . Ask Tony was doomed from the moment Kupcinet leveled on it in his Sun-Times column . We opened on Friday and closed the following Monday . Out of the entire cast I alone received good notices for my portrayal of a psychopathic killer . This let me in for a lot of kidding from the rest of the company , two members of which were native Chicagoans . We were paid off Tuesday morning and given tickets back to New York . I felt lonely and depressed as I packed my bags at the Croydon Hotel . It seemed to me that my life was destined to be one brilliant failure after another . I had been among the top third in my class at N.Y.U. , had wanted desperately to go to medical school , but I'd run out of money and energy at the same time . Then later I had quit my safe , secure five-a-week spot on a network soap opera to take a part in this play . It seemed to me that I was not only unlucky but quite stupid as well . I knew that I'd soon be back working as an orderly at the hospital or as a counterman at Union News or Schraffts while waiting for another acting job to open . It suddenly occurred to me that I did not particularly like acting , that I was at some sort of crossroads and would have to decide soon what I was going to do with my life . I closed the last bag and stood all three at the door for the bellboy to pick up , then went to the bathroom for a drink of water . The telephone rang . When I answered it a voice too dignified and British to be real said , `` Is this Mr. Dale Nelson , the actor '' ? ? `` All right '' , I said . `` Why don't you bastards lay off for a while '' ? ? `` I beg your pardon , sir '' ? ? `` All right . This is Dale Nelson the actor '' . `` Good . I'm calling you , Mr. Nelson , at the request of Mr. Phillip Wycoff . Could you possibly have lunch with him today ? ? His car could pick you up at your hotel at twelve '' . I smiled . `` You'll send the Rolls-Royce , of course '' ? ? `` Yes , of course , Mr. Nelson '' . I started to say something else appropriate , but the man had hung up . I finally went downstairs to the bar off the main lobby where most of the cast were drowning their sorrows over the untimely passing of Ask Tony . They all bowed low as I approached them . `` All right , you bastards '' , I said , `` the great actor is about to buy a drink '' . I laid a tenspot on the bar and motioned to the bartender to serve a round . He had just returned my change when the doorman came in off the street to page me . I walked over to him . `` You Mr. Nelson '' ? ? He asked . `` That's right '' . `` Mr. Wycoff's car is waiting for you at the east entrance '' . I followed him out through the lobby to the street . An ancient Rolls-Royce , as shiningly impressive as the day it came off the ship , was parked at the curb . The elderly chauffeur , immaculate in a dark uniform , stood stiffly at attention holding open the door of the town car . I was giving the parked cars the once-over . The Oldsmobile with the license number JYJ 114 was in stall number five . `` Okay '' , I said to the attendant , `` I'll let you know if I close the deal on the office in this building '' . I walked with him back to the entrance . He gave me a ticket on the agency car and parked it . I was back in ten minutes . `` Forgot to get something out of the car '' , I told him , showing him my ticket . He started to say something as I walked in and then suddenly grinned and said , `` Oh , yes . You're the one I was talking to about a monthly rental . `` That's right '' , I told him . He consulted the parking ticket , then looked at a notation and said , `` You're in the third row back toward the rear . Can you find it all right '' ? ? `` Sure '' , I told him . I went back to the agency car and got out an electric bug , one of the newest devices for electronic shadowing . I always keep a set in the car . I put in new batteries so as to be certain I'd have plenty of power and on my way out walked over to the regular parking stalls and stood looking at them thoughtfully . I waited until the parking attendant was busy with a customer , then slipped around the back of the car with license number JYM 114 , attached the electronic bug to the rear bumper and walked out . The attendant waved me on . One of the hardest chores a detective has is hanging around on a city street , trying to make himself inconspicuous , keeping an eye on the entrance of an office building and waiting . For the first fifteen or twenty minutes it's possible to be more or less interested in window displays , then in people passing by . After a while , however , a person's mind gets fed up and that magnifies all of the disagreeable physical symptoms which go with that sort of an assignment . You want to sit down . Your leg muscles and back muscles feel weary . You're conscious of the fact that your feet hurt , that the city pavements are hard . I waited a solid two hours before my man came out of the office building . He came out alone . I wasn't far behind him when he entered the parking lot and hurried over to his car . The attendant recognized me once more and said , `` What did you do about that office '' ? ? `` I haven't made up my mind yet '' , I said . `` It's a sublease . I have a couple of them I'm figuring on ; ; one here and one that's out quite a ways where there's usually curb parking '' . `` That curb parking is undependable and annoying , particularly when it rains '' , he said . I kept trying to get him to take my money . `` Okay '' , I told him . `` I'm in a rush right now . I know where the car is . Want me to drive it out '' ? ? `` I'll have one of the boys get it '' , he said . `` It's one of the rules on transients . Regulars drive out their own cars '' . `` Make it as snappy as you can , will you '' ? ? I asked . `` Oh , that's all right '' , he said . `` You're going to be a regular . You'll get in the office building here . You don't want to lease a place way out in the sticks . You get business where the business is , not where it isn't '' . I grinned at him , handed him a couple of dollars and said , `` By the time you get the parking charge figured up , there should be a cigar in it for you '' . I hurried over to the agency heap , jumped in , started the motor and was just in time to see the car I wanted to shadow turn to the left . I was held up a bit trying to make a left turn . By the time I'd made it he was gone . Traffic was pretty heavy . I turned on the electric bug , and the signal came in loud and clear . I made time and picked him up within ten blocks . I stayed half a block behind him , letting lots of cars keep in between us , listening to the steady beep beep beep . After fifteen minutes of traffic driving he turned to the left . I couldn't see him , but the electric bugging device gave steady beeps when it was straight ahead , short half beeps when the car I was following was to the left , and long drawn-out beeps when it turned to the right . If it ever got behind me , the beep turned to a buzz . I turned left too soon and got a signal showing that I was still behind him but he was to the right . After a while the signal became a buzz and I knew he was behind me . That meant he'd parked someplace . I made a big circle until I located the car parked at the curb in front of an apartment house . I found a parking place half a block away , sat in the car and waited . My quarry was in the apartment house for two hours . Then he came out and started driving toward the beach . By this time it was dark . I could get up close to him where there was traffic but had to drop far behind when there wasn't traffic . My lights would have been a giveaway if I'd tried to shadow him in the conventional manner . Moreover , I'd have lost him if it hadn't been for the electronic shadowing device . His signal was coming loud and clear and then all of a sudden it turned to a buzz . I circled the block and found he was in the parking lot of a high-class restaurant . I sat where I could watch the exit and realized I was hungry . I sat there with the faint odor of charcoal-broiled steaks tantalizing my nostrils and occasionally catching the aroma of coffee . My man came out an hour later , drove to the beach , turned right and after half a mile went to the Swim and Tan Motel . It was a fairly modern motel with quite a bit of electrical display in front . I remembered it was the Peeping Tom place . I waited until my man was coming out of the office with the key to a cabin before I went in to register . The card the man I was shadowing had filled out was still on the counter . I noticed that he was in Unit 12 and that he had registered under the name of Oscar L. Palmer and wife , giving a San Francisco address . He had written out the license number of his car but had transposed the last two figures , an old dodge which is still good . Ninety-nine times out of a hundred the motel manager doesn't check the license number on the plates against the license number the tenant writes out . If he does , it's still better than an even chance he won't notice the transposition of the numbers , and if he should notice it , the thing can be passed off as an honest mistake . I used the alias of Robert C. Richards , gave the first three letters and the first and last figure of the license number on the agency heap , but a couple of phony numbers in between . I could have written anything . The manager of the motel was a woman who apparently didn't care . She was complying with the law in regard to registrations but she certainly wasn't checking license numbers or bothering the tenants . `` You mean you're all alone , Mr. Richards '' ? ? `` That's right '' . `` Your wife isn't going to join you -- later '' ? ? `` I don't think so '' . `` If you expect her to show up '' , she said , `` you'd better put ' and wife ' on there . It's a formality , you know '' . `` Any difference in the rate '' ? ? I asked . `` Not to you '' , she said smiling . `` It's ten dollars either way . There are ice cubes in a container at the far end and in another by the office . There are three soft-drink vending machines , and if you should be joined by -- anybody -- try to keep things quiet , if you will . We like to run a nice quiet place '' . `` Thank you '' , I told her . I took another sidelong glance at the other registration card , then took the key to Unit 13 that she had given me and went down long enough to park the car . The construction was reasonably solid ; ; not like the cracker-box construction of so many of the motel units that have stucco all over the outside but walls that are thin enough so you can hear every movement of the people in the adjoining apartment . I put a small electric amplifier against the wall on the side I wanted to case . With the aid of that I could hear my man moving around , heard him cough a couple of times , heard the toilet flush , heard the sound of water running . Whoever his companion was going to be , she was going to join him later . She knew where to come . He didn't have to telephone . I was so hungry my stomach felt all lines of communication had been severed . It's one thing to go without food when you're occupied with some work or when you're simply postponing a meal , but when you're dependent on someone else and know that you can't eat until he's bedded down for the night , hunger can be a gnawing torture . I had noticed a drive-in down the road a quarter of a mile . The batteries on the bugging device I had put on the car were still fresh enough to send out good strong signals . The powerful microphone I could press against the wall between my motel unit and that occupied by the man would bring in the sound of any conversation , and I was positively nauseated I was so hungry . I got in the car , drove down to the drive-in and ordered a couple of hamburgers with everything included , a cup of coffee and the fastest service possible . The place wasn't particularly busy at that time of night , and the girl who was waiting on me , who was clothed in the tightest-fitting pair of slacks I had ever seen on a woman and a sweater that showed everything there was -- and there was lots of it -- wanted to be sociable . `` You really in a hurry , Handsome '' ? ? She asked . `` I'm in a hurry , Beautiful '' . `` It's early in the evening to be in a hurry . There's lots of time left '' . `` There may not be any women left '' , I said . She gave a little pout and said , `` I don't get off work until eleven o'clock . That's when my evening commences '' . `` I'll be here at ten-fifty-five '' , I said . `` Oh , you ! ! '' She announced . `` That's what they all say . What's that thing going buzz-buzz-buzz in your car '' ? ? I said `` Darn it , that's the automatic signal that shows when the ignition key is on . I didn't turn it off '' . I reached over and switched off the electronic bugging device . She went in to get the hamburgers , and I switched on the device again and kept the signal from Dowling's car coming in steady and clear until I saw her starting back with the hamburgers . Then I shut off the device again . She wanted to hang around while I was eating . `` Don't you think it's selfish to have dinner before you go to pick her up '' ? ? `` No '' , I said . `` It's a kindness to her . You see , she's on a diet . She'll eat just a pineapple and cottage cheese salad and I'm to have one with her so she won't feel out of place '' . `` Diets can be terrible '' , the girl said . `` How much overweight is she '' ? ? `` Not a bit '' , I said , `` but she's keeping her figure in hand '' . She looked at me provocatively . `` Good figures should be kept in hand '' , she said , and walked away with an exaggerated wiggle . I turned on the device again , half fearful that I might find silence , but the buzzes came in loud and clear . When I switched on the lights for her to come and get the check , I had the exact change plus a dollar tip . The fat man said , `` All we gotta do is go around the corner '' . The gun moved . The thin man said , `` That-a-way '' . `` -- second building on the right '' . `` -- it says police right on the door '' . `` -- so even if we was as dumb as you take us for , we could still find it '' . Roberta and Dave began to back toward the door . The thin man waved the gun again . He said , `` Right around the corner '' . `` It says water works , but there is a policeman on duty , too '' . `` A night policeman just like in the States . You know '' ? ? `` Canada doesn't have much of this here juvenile delinquency problem , but we keep a night policeman all the same on account of the crazy tourists '' . At the door , Dave paused to feel for the latch . Roberta glanced up at her husband . He was going to be sensible and not try to do anything rash with that gun pointed at him . She measured the distance from where they stood to the men and the gun , measured the distance from the men to the back room . She decided to risk it . There was something phony about all this gun waving -- something not quite what it seemed in the detailed directions for finding the police . Dave had the latch under his thumb now and he removed his arm from his wife in order to pull the door open . In a flash she was away to the back , paying no attention to three angry shouts from the male throats . She tore open the back door . It was dark inside the room but enough light spilled from the restaurant behind her to enable her to make out a round table with a green cloth top . There was a small sideboard with some empty beer bottles on it and perhaps fifteen wooden chairs . Slowly she turned to face the men again . Rat-face at the counter was on his feet . The distance between where she stood and where Dave waited at the outside door was a hundred miles . Keeping her frightened gaze on the men at the counter , she began to feel her way to the door . She sidled along the booths one step at a time . The gun followed her . As she reached Dave and felt his arm go around her , felt him pull her to the safety of his person , she knew with the certainty of despair that something bad had happened to Lauren . The two men watched as Dave closed the door behind them , watched them cross the sidewalk to their car . It was getting light . The fat man removed his apron , put on a greasy and wrinkled jacket , and zipped it over his paunch . The thin man moved swiftly to the phone and dialed a number . When he was answered , he said , `` Albert ? ? Vince . I'm sending you a couple of customers -- yeah -- just get them out of my hair and keep them out -- I don't give a damn what you tell them -- only don't believe a word they say -- they're out to make trouble for me and it is up to you to stop them -- I don't care how -- and one more thing -- Cate's Cafe closed at eleven like always last night and Rose and Clarence Corsi left for Quebec yesterday -- some shrine or other -- I think it was called Saint Simon's -- yeah , yesterday . Got it '' ? ? He turned from the phone and strode to the front of the restaurant . The white Buick hadn't moved away yet . Good . A line of worry formed , a twitch pulled his mouth over to one side . He said , `` Grosse ? ? You ain't kidding me -- the kid don't know the name of this town '' ? ? `` I ain't kidding you , Vince . How could she ? ? She musta been walking in her sleep -- you seen her yourself in here '' . `` Howda I know '' ? ? `` Remember how she looked when Barney held the door for her ? ? Kinda like a zombie ? ? She was just waking up when we found her at the garage '' . Vince swore . `` Stupid fools -- ain't got enough brains between the two of you '' -- Grosse muttered , his head down , one hand playing with the zipper on his jacket . `` -- had enough brains to call ya up so as ya could do sompin about it when the parents -- I coulda let her go go '' -- His eyes were lowered , so he couldn't have seen the narrow , pointed face of his companion suddenly writhe with fury ; ; but he was aware of it just the same . He knew Vince Steiner was one of those men who had to work up a fury once in a while just to prove how dangerous he could be . With a curse , Vince seized the thing nearest , a glass sugar container with a spouted metal top , and threw it against the wall opposite . The heavy glass didn't break , but the top flew off ; ; sugar sprayed with a hiss that was loud in the silence . Not really startled , but careful to appear so , Grosse sucked noisily on his pipe . Vince cursed steadily . `` Why does everything have to happen to me '' ? ? Grosse quietly got a broom and started to sweep up the sugar . Vince watched him . His mouth worked over the profanity , the obscenities in his vocabulary . Once he said , `` Why'n hell didn't you look in the back seat of the car before you drove off ? ? Don't you and Barney ever use your brains '' ? ? The fat man didn't answer . He got one of the menus and brushed the spilled sugar onto it and carried it to a box on the floor behind the counter . He returned the menu to its place between catchup bottle and paper napkin dispenser . He spoke soothingly . `` She don't know nothing about them cars . She thinks she's in a ordinary garage '' . `` How do you know , stupid ? ? And put Cate's gun back '' . `` I know '' . Grosse tucked the gun under the counter . `` -- one word of this gets to Guardino '' -- `` Who's telling Guardino '' ? ? Vince swore again . `` You get that kid over to Rose's house '' . The fat man winced . He ran a finger down his cheek , tracing the scratch there . `` Why can't I leave her locked up in the tool crib '' ? ? The thin man stopped his pacing long enough to glance at the clock . `` You and Barney get her over to Rose's before it gets too light . After Guardino's left , we'll dump the kid somewhere near the border where she kin get home . God help you if she knows where she's been '' . Grosse spread his hands . `` What am I going to do with her all day ? ? In the tool crib she can't get away '' . `` What the hell do I care what you do with her all day ? ? Just get her where Guardino won't see her and start asking questions '' . Grosse swore now . `` Dammit all , Vince . I ain't no baby sitter '' . Vince shouted finally , `` Get her over to Rose's and I'll come by and see that she stays put '' . Grosse rubbed the bridge of his nose where it was swollen . He spoke sullenly . `` You don't hafta get nasty . I wish you luck when you try scaring that kid '' . Suddenly he grinned . His voice lost its sullen tones and he chuckled . `` I got one question '' . `` What is it '' ? ? Impatiently . `` Are you a poor dumb Canadian or a smart aleck from the States '' ? ? Vince lifted his hand as if to strike , but his thin lips spread in a smile . Grosse ducked and sniggered . `` Where'd you say you was born '' ? ? `` In a Chicago slum just like you . And I ain't going back there on account of one lousy kid '' . Lauren Landis rubbed her face against the blanket . She had cried a little because she was frightened . She could easily understand why the two men had been startled to find a strange girl in the back seat of their car ( she had figured that out ) , but she couldn't understand their subsequent actions . Was it because she had shown panic ? ? Who could blame her for that ? ? It was one thing to awaken outside a restaurant where your parents were eating and quite another to awaken in a strange garage and know your parents had gone on home without you . She was glad the fat man had left . Barney was not really frightening . She jumped as the little man now appeared at the window and , reaching through the opening , offered her a bottle of coke . She smiled at him wetly . Although she found she was thirsty , she was about to refuse ( never , never take candy from a strange man ) when she saw the bottle was unopened . He placed a bottle opener on the counter . So , he understood her panic . She blew her nose on a tissue and opened the coke bottle . It was icy cold and tasted delicious . She felt a lift in spirit . When she was finished she pushed it back . The man was busy doing something to the inside of the door-frame on the driver's side of a car . She called softly , `` Barney '' . He looked in her direction but he didn't answer . She said , `` Barney , why is he keeping me here '' ? ? Still no answer . He seemed to be looking at a point above the little window . Lauren said , `` Why can't I call my home ? ? Or borrow some money from someone and go home by bus ? ? I could send the money right back '' . Barney finished the cigarette he had been smoking . He dropped it and carefully ground it to nothing with the sole of his heavy shoe . Now he looked at her . He said , `` I only work here '' . Lauren said , `` Please '' ? ? But he was back at work on a car . She dropped her head on her arms on the counter . How could he be kind one moment and cruel the next ? ? Did he know something that made him feel sad and sorry for her ? ? And was he afraid to do anything as definite as releasing her ? ? Her heart was thumping painfully ; ; the unknown was so much worse than -- what dangers lay ahead for her ? ? What awful thing had she to face in the next few hours ? ? Something wet and hot was trickling on her wrists . Tears ? ? With a sturdy act of will she turned her mind away from herself ; ; as long as she could do nothing constructive about the situation she was in , she would think about something else . Her mother and father , for instance . Where were they now ? ? In her mind she followed the white Buick along the road somewhere between here and the Niagara River . Her father's attention would be on the road ahead and it wouldn't deviate an inch until he crossed the bridge at the Falls and took the River Road to LaSalle and , finally , turned in at their own driveway at 387 Heather Heights . Then he would yawn and stretch and shout , `` All out . This is the end of the line '' . And what would her mother be doing right now ? ? Her mother would be fast asleep curled up against that wonderful , big , safe , solid shoulder next to her on the front seat . Lauren Landis was in trouble and she was alone . Roberta Landis put her hand on her husband's arm as he slid in the driver's seat beside her . Somewhere birds were sweetly calling , were answered . Her teeth chattered so that she made three attempts at speech before she became intelligible . `` Dave . I saw that woman's apron behind the door . There was a wet spot -- she couldn't have been gone long '' . Dave made some sound meant to convey agreement . He inserted the car key in the lock . Roberta was violently trembling . She stammered , `` You heard what he said about police ? ? Why don't we drive around the corner '' ? ? The car door crashed shut . The engine throbbed into life . Dave said , `` I got the message . We're going '' . Roberta said , `` no . You go . Walk . Suppose Lauren comes looking for us ? ? I can sit here in the car while you walk around the corner '' . The big car sprang away from the curb like something alive . He said , `` I'm not going to leave my wife and my car out here in sight of those '' -- Roberta glanced at him and stopped trembling . His jowls were spiked by barbs of graying beard . His small , mean eyes regarded Marty steadily , unblinkingly . His eyes were threaded by little filaments of red as if tiny veins had burst and flooded blood into them . As he chewed his gum and exuded wheezing breath , Marty smelt the reek of bad whiskey . Marty recognized the man . He had driven the car that passed them on the road outside Admassy's place . This was Acey Squire , proprietor of the juke joint . Marty smiled at Squire pleasantly and said , `` There was a cab waiting for me here . Do you know where it might have gone '' ? ? Squire chewed his gum , his jaw moving in a steady rhythm . He looked straight at Marty . He did not answer . Marty scanned the faces of the others nearest him , looked into their staring eyes . `` Did anyone see my cab '' ? ? He asked , keeping his voice casual . He avoided showing any surprise or annoyance when no one answered him . `` I have to get back to Jarrodsville '' , he went on . `` I see there are some cars here . I wonder if one of you gentlemen could drive me back to town ? ? I'd be happy to pay for the favor , of course '' . The seventeen men stood and stared at him for a moment longer . And then a startling thing occurred . It was so utterly unexpected that Marty stood for several moments with his mouth hanging open foolishly after it had happened . There was no word spoken , no apparent signal given . Yet the men all moved at the same instant . They piled into the waiting cars , motors roared , the cars sped off . The station wagon and the old Plymouth headed east toward Jarrodsville . The Ford and the pickup truck sped west toward Sanford's Run . In seconds all four cars were out of sight . Marty Land stood alone on a red-clay road as storm clouds gathered ominously in the sky again . From a great distance thunder growled and broke the silence . Land looked back toward the dilapidated house . He thought he saw a pale face at a window . Perhaps it was Dora May . Perhaps she would be glad that they hadn't hurt him . There were other farmhouses nearby . Across the road there was one no more than a hundred yards away . There was another on this side , a little further down . There were many more between here and Jarrodsville . Telephone poles lined the road . They reared tall and mocking . Their wires stretched out into infinity . Not a single strand of wire reached into the silent houses beside the red-clay road . There was nothing he could do but walk . And Jarrodsville was more than three miles away , down an old dirt road that the rain had turned into a quagmire . Marty faced east and started walking down the left side of the road . After he had proceeded a few feet , he paused and turned up the cuffs of his trousers , which were already damp and mud-caked . The viscous mud was ankle-deep , and in places great puddles spread across the road and reflected the murky light . As he approached the first farmhouse , thunder sounded behind him again , closer now and louder , like a steadily advancing drum corps . There were several people on the porch of the farmhouse . There was a very old man and a young woman and a brood of children ranging from toddlers to teen-agers . For just an instant he thought of appealing to them for help . Perhaps they had a car or truck and would drive him into town . Then he realized the utter futility of the idea . They were staring at him in the same blank and menacing way that the men outside the gate had stared . Even the eyes of the smallest children seemed malicious . On his side of the road there were two farm hands , well back in a field , leaning against a plow . They , too , stared at him . The drums of thunder were right behind him now . A foolish thought came into his head . He remembered a story he had read as a youth . It was probably one of Kipling's tales of the British Army . It concerned an officer who had been disgraced and drummed out . The steady roll of the drums had sounded behind him as he walked between the endless ranks of the men he had commanded , and each man about-faced and turned his back as the officer approached . Marty wished these poor farm people would turn their backs . The fencing by the roadside ended . Now the dirt highway was bordered on either side by a fairly deep drainage ditch , too broad to leap over unless you were an Olympic star . The day's rain had been added to the stagnant water . He was trapped on the road when he heard the sound of an approaching car . It was coming toward him . The car was now in sight . Marty's heart skipped a beat when he recognized it . It was the station wagon that had passed his cab on the road , the station wagon that had been parked at the Burch farm . Acey Squire's station wagon . It had headed back toward Jarrodsville . That had only been a ruse to lure him out on the deserted road . Now Acey and his friends were returning to seek him out . The station wagon came to a stop a couple of hundred feet in front of him , beside a fenced field . Then there was another sound . A second car was coming from the west , from the direction of Sanford's Run . It was the Ford that had been outside Burch's farm . Marty looked helplessly in both directions . It was a narrow road , barely wide enough for two cars to pass . He could not leave the road because of the water-filled drainage ditch . When the two cars were equidistant from him , the station wagon started up again and the Ford gathered speed . They bore down on him . There was nothing he could do except jump into the ditch . He jumped , and sank to his knees in muddy water . As the two cars roared by , there was a high-pitched eerie , nerve-shattering sound . Marty knew how the Union soldiers must have felt at Chancellorsville and Antietam and Gettysburg when the ragged gray ranks charged at them , screaming the wild banshee howl they called the Rebel yell . For moments he stood in water , shivering and gasping for breath . He had turned his ankle slightly , and it pained him . The cars , with their load of howling men , had disappeared in the distance . There had been two more cars parked at the farm , a Plymouth and a pickup truck . They would be coming for him next , bearing down on him from both directions . And then the station wagon and the Ford would seek him out again . He would be harassed repeatedly and would escape death by inches time after time , all the way to Jarrodsville . He still had three miles to go . Back East the more affluent juvenile delinquents , who could afford hyped-up autos instead of switch blades as lethal weapons , played this same game and called it `` Chicken '' . He could not go through the fields . That way was barred on both sides of the road by a high barbed-wire fence . He had to make for the section of road just ahead that was bordered by the rail fence , the section by the farmhouse . At least he could climb up on the fence when his tormenters roared by again . The Admassy place could not be far now . He would go in there , climb through the window , and at least be safe for a little while and able to rest . There was even a bare chance that the phone had not been disconnected . He did not dare climb back up to the road . He was deep in water , but at least they could not reach him there . He splashed on , mud sucking at his feet with each step , until he reached the end of the drainage ditch and the beginning of the fence that enclosed the farm . He climbed back to the road , and he felt utterly exhausted . He stood , panting , for a moment . And then he saw something that he had not seen before , and panic gripped him again . The fence , his only refuge when the metal death came roaring at him , was made of rails , all right , but the rails were protected by a thick screening of barbed wire that would rip his flesh if he pressed against it . He lurched on down the road despairingly , because there was no place else to go . He lost all sense of dignity . You could not stand on dignity when you were soaked and muddied and your life was at stake . Probably people were watching him from the porch or from behind the windows of this farmhouse , too , but he did not bother to look . He broke into a dogtrot , breathing heavily , streaming with sweat . He had to reach Admassy's place . It was his only sanctuary . The fences on both sides of the road bristled with the barbed wire . The fences stretched on endlessly . And then he heard them . And now he saw them . The Plymouth was coming at him from the east , the pickup truck from the west . They had timed it better this time . They would reach him at almost exactly the same instant . He stopped stone-still . If he backed against the fence , one of the cars would brush him as it passed , and he would be cruelly lacerated by the wire . He stumbled to the middle of the road and simply stood there , waiting for them , a perfect target . The cars must have had their gas pedals pushed down to the floor boards . They were coming on at reckless speed for such old vehicles . They thundered at him . He held his arms close to his sides and made himself as small as possible . When the Plymouth neared , it veered toward him and seemed about to run him down . He forced himself to stay frozen there . If he moved , he would be in the path of the other car . He thought the fender of the Plymouth brushed his jacket as it went by . In a fraction of a second the pickup truck hurtled by on the other side . The weird , insane sound of the Rebel yell reverberated again and echoed from the distant hills . He did not leave the middle of the road . He did not try to run . He trudged on , his aching eyes focused straight ahead . He was nearing the Admassy house . He was going to make it , he told himself . And then he heard a car coming from the east , and he felt as if he would break down and weep . `` Oh , no , not again '' , he said aloud . `` Not again so soon '' . There was a new sound , a sound as piercing as the Rebel yell , yet different . It was the sound of a siren . Now he saw that the approaching car was painted white , and he began to wave his arms frantically . It was the prowl car from the sheriff's office . The car drew up alongside him and stopped . `` Get in '' , Charley Estes said brusquely . He staggered into the back seat and lay back , fighting for breath . There was someone in front with the sheriff . It was Pete Holmes , the cabdriver . Pete turned around and said to Marty , `` I guess you think I'm a yellow-bellied hound . But there wasn't no use in me staying there . I couldn't fight a dozen or so of 'em . If I'd stayed , all that I'd have got was four punctured tires and one busted head . Why didn't you wait at the Burch house ? ? You must've known I'd gone to get the sheriff . I was lucky they let me go , I guess '' . The sheriff was occupied with maneuvering the car around in a very narrow space . When it was finally pointed east , he said , `` You should never have come out here alone . This is redneck country . Every man in every one of these houses is a Night Rider . Then he turned the telephone over to Rourke , and went into the bedroom to change his slippers for dry socks and shoes . Rourke was talking on the phone when he came back . `` About an hour , eh ? ? Are you positive '' ? ? He listened a moment and then said , `` Hold it '' . He turned his head and said , `` Alvarez will definitely be in a back room at the Jai Alai Club on South Beach within an hour . Want to try and meet him there '' ? ? Shayne looked at his watch . That wasn't too far from Fifth Street , and should allow him to make Scotty's Bar by midnight . He said with satisfaction , `` That's fine , Tim . I'll be there '' . Rourke confirmed the appointment over the phone and hung up . `` I don't know what you're getting into , Mike '' , he said unhappily . `` I hope to Christ . '' Shayne said briskly , `` Grab another drink if you want it . We've got one other call to make before I meet Alvarez '' . `` Where '' ? ? `` It's out in the Northeast section . Have you got my car here '' ? ? `` It's parked in front '' . Rourke hastily slopped whiskey into his glass on top of half-melted ice-cubes . `` I'd better keep on driving yours '' , Shayne decided , `` because I'll be going on over to the Beach . I can drop you back here to pick mine up '' . He went to a closet to get a light jacket , and took his hat from beside the door . Timothy Rourke gulped down the whiskey hastily and joined him , asking , `` Who are we going to call on in the Northeast section '' ? ? `` A lady . That is , maybe not too much of a lady . At least , I want to find out whether she's home yet or not '' . He opened the door and followed Rourke out . In Rourke's car , Shayne drove east to Biscayne Boulevard and north toward Felice Perrin's address which had been given to him by the Peralta governess . As he drove , he filled in Timothy Rourke briefly on the events of the evening after leaving the reporter to go to the Peralta house , and on his own surmises . `` I want to be in Scotty's Bar at midnight when Marsha makes her phone call there '' , he ended grimly . `` I don't know whether that threatening letter of hers has anything to do with this situation or not , but I want to see who takes the call '' . `` This deal at Las Putas Buenas where the two knife-men jumped you '' , said Rourke with interest , `` that sounds like it was set up with malice aforethought by the luscious Mrs. Peralta , doesn't it '' ? ? `` It does '' , Shayne grunted sourly , still able to taste her mouth on his in the Green Jungle parking lot . `` That story of hers about an unsigned note directing her to be there tonight sounds completely phony . If it was designed to put me on the spot , it would have to have been written before Peralta ever called me in on the case '' . `` Do you think Laura did have the counterfeit bracelet made without her husband's knowledge '' ? ? `` I haven't the faintest idea . I think her husband strongly suspects so , and that's why he called me in on the thing in direct defiance of his confederates and almost certainly without telling them why he was doing so . Isn't this Felice's street '' ? ? Shayne asked , peering ahead at the partially obscured street sign . Rourke could see it better out the right-hand side , and he said , `` yes . Turn to the left , I think , for that number you gave me . Not more than a block or so '' . Shayne got in the left-hand lane and cut across the Boulevard divider . There was a small , neon-lighted restaurant and cocktail lounge on the southeast corner of the intersection as he turned into the quiet , palm-lined street where most of the houses on both sides were older two-story mansions , now cut up into furnished rooms and housekeeping apartments . Shayne drove westward from the Boulevard slowly , letting Rourke crane his head out the window and watch for street numbers . A single automobile was parked half-way up the block on the left-hand side . Shayne noted idly that it carried Miami Beach license plates as he approached , and then saw the flare of a match in the front seat as they passed , indicating that it was occupied . He turned to see the briefly-illumed faces of two men in the parked car just as Rourke said , `` It's the next house , Mike . On the right '' . Instead of pulling into the curb , Shayne increased his speed slightly to the corner where he swung left . He went around the corner and parked , turning off his lights and motor . `` I told you , Mike '' , said Rourke in an aggrieved voice . `` It was back there . '' Shayne said , `` I know it was , Tim '' . His voice was chilling and cold . `` Did you see the car parked across the street '' ? ? `` I didn't notice it . I was watching for numbers . '' `` It has a Beach license , Tim . Two men in the front seat . I got a quick look at their faces as we went past . Unless I'm crazy as hell , they're two of Painter's dicks . A couple named Harris and Geely . Those names mean anything to you '' ? ? `` Wait a minute , Mike . In Painter's office this evening . '' Shayne nodded grimly . `` The pair whom Petey is officially commending for slapping me around and pulling me in '' . `` What are they doing here '' ? ? `` A stake-out , I suppose . On Felice Perrin . Maybe with specific orders to see that I don't make contact with her . I'm not positive , Tim . I may be wrong . I'll slide out and walk around the block back to the cocktail lounge on Biscayne . You drive on and circle back and pull up beside them parked there . You're a reporter , and you're looking for Miss Perrin to interview her . Make them show their hands . If they are Beach cops on a stake-out , they'll admit it to a reporter . They've got no official standing on this side of the Bay . As soon as you find out if they are Geely and Harris , come on around to the lounge where I'll be waiting '' . Shayne opened the door on his side and stepped out . Timothy Rourke groaned dismally as he slid under the wheel . `` The things you talk me into , Mike . '' Shayne chuckled . `` How often do they add up to headlines ? ? You should complain '' . He crossed the street and walked swiftly southward to circle back to the Boulevard and north a block to the open restaurant . He was standing at the end of the bar enjoying a slug of cognac when Rourke came in six or eight minutes later . The reporter nodded as he moved up beside him at the bar . Shayne told the bartender , `` Bourbon and water '' , and Rourke told him , `` It's those two , all right . Harris and Geely . I made them show me their identification before I could be persuaded not to call on Felice Perrin '' . Shayne said happily , `` I've got it all worked out , Tim . Take your time with your drink . I'll beat it . In exactly three minutes , go in that phone booth behind you and call Police Headquarters . Be excited and don't identify yourself . Just say that a couple of drunks are having a hell of a fight down the street , and they better send a patrol car . Then hang up fast and come walking on down to the Perrin address . I'll be waiting for you there '' . The bartender brought Rourke's drink and Shayne laid a twenty-dollar bill on the bar . He said in a low voice , `` I've got a date with a lady , Mister . Will that pay for a pint I can take with me . You know how it is '' , he added with a conspiratorial wink . `` Candy is dandy , but liquor is quicker and you don't have any candy for sale here anyhow '' . `` We sure don't '' . The bartender winked back at him and palmed the bill . He turned away and returned in a moment with a pint of brandy in a small paper sack which he slid over the counter to Shayne . As the detective slid it into his pocket , Rourke asked sadly , `` What in hell are you going to do , Mike '' ? ? `` Make a couple of punk detectives named Geely and Harris wish to God they'd stayed out of my way this afternoon . Three minutes , Tim '' . Shayne strode out blithely , and Rourke checked his watch and sipped his drink , getting a dime ready to make the telephone call to the police . Outside , Shayne hesitated when he saw that Rourke had parked his coupe directly in front of the bar headed south . He walked over to the right-hand door , opened it and got the reloaded automatic out of the glove compartment and put it in his hip pocket . He hoped he wouldn't be forced to use it in taking care of the Beach detectives , but its weight was comforting at his hip . On this side of the Bay , Miami Beach cops had no more legal rights than any ordinary citizen , and Shayne's pistol permit was just as good as theirs . He went swiftly up the sidewalk toward the parked car with the two Beach detectives in the front seat . He tugged the brim of his hat low as he approached , stepped out into the street just behind the car and strode around to the right-hand side . The big , paunchy man named Geely was on that side , half-turned in the seat toward his hatchet-faced companion so that his back partially rested against the closed door . Shayne turned the handle and jerked the door open before either of the men were quite aware of his presence in the night . Geely grunted and slid partly out , and Shayne's left arm snaked in around his neck to help him , while he set himself solidly on the roadway and swung his right fist to the big , gum-chewing jaw before Geely could straighten up . Shayne stepped back to let him slump to the ground , and then dived over him through the open door into Harris who was cursing loudly and trying to drag a gun from a shoulder holster , somewhat impeded by the steering wheel . Shayne locked his big hands around Harris' thin neck and dragged him out over the seat into the roadway . He hit him once on the sharp point of his chin and felt the body go limp . He dropped him into the street a couple of feet away from Geely's recumbent figure and stared down at both of them for a moment before kicking the big man lightly in the side . He didn't stir . They were both breathing heavily , out cold , and Shayne didn't think either of them had recognized him or could describe him . He got the pint of liquor out of his pocket and unscrewed the top , sprinkled the pungent stuff liberally over both men , and then tossed the open bottle in on the front seat . He turned , then , to look toward the lighted Boulevard , and saw Rourke's tall , emaciated figure come out of the lounge and hurriedly start to angle across the street toward the opposite side . Shayne strolled across to intercept the reporter in front of the two-story house where Felice Perrin lived , and asked casually , `` Get the police okay '' ? ? `` Sure . Said they'd have a patrol car here fast . Let's get inside . What happened with you '' ? ? `` Why the two damned fools got all excited when they saw the bottle , and knocked each other out cold '' , Shayne said good-humoredly . `` They'll have fun explaining that to the Miami cops . Got no business over here on a stake-out anyway '' . They went up onto a front porch and into a small hallway where a dim bulb burned high in the ceiling . A row of mailboxes along the wall had numbers and names on them . Shayne found one marked Perrin Aj . The stairway on the right was dark , but there was a wall-switch at the bottom which lighted another dim bulb at the top , and they went up . There were two front rooms , both dark behind their transoms , and there was no sound or light in the entire house to indicate that any of the occupants were awake . Eight , nine steps above him , Roberts had paused . Mickey paused with him , waiting , no longer impatient , trying now to think it out , do a little planning . He looked down over the banister at the hotel desk , with the telephone and pen set . If I could call in , they could check the story while we were on our way . I wouldn't have to tell them I had Roberts -- Then he heard it , like a muffled thud , felt a subtle change in air pressure . He glanced up in time to see Roberts hurtling down on him from above , literally flying through the air , his bloody face twisted . Mickey tried to flatten against the banister , gripped it with one hand , but Roberts' full weight struck him at that moment in the groin . He gasped for air and the impact tore his hand from the rail . He tumbled with Roberts , helpless and in agony , over and over , down the steps . By a wrenching effort , he managed to hunch and draw in , to take the final fall on his back and shoulders rather than his head . He was fuzzy in his mind and , for a moment , helpless on the lobby floor , but he was conscious , and free of the weight of Roberts' body . When his vision cleared he saw the taller one scrambling upward , reaching . Mickey was on his knees when Roberts turned on the stairs and the razor flashed in his hand . He felt his empty pocket and knew that Roberts had retrieved the only weapon at hand . Mickey's eyes fixed on the other's feet , which would first betray the moment and direction of an attack . He rose stiffly , forcing his knees to lock . The knifelike pain in his groin nearly brought him down again . He made himself back off slowly , his eyes wary on Roberts , who now had no more to lose than he . The pain dulled as he moved , and he steadied inside . After a moment he extended one hand , the fingers curled . `` Come on '' , he said . `` You want to be that big a fool -- I was hoping for this '' . Roberts brushed at his eyes with his free hand and started down the steps . He held the razor well out to one side . He was invulnerable to attack , but he could be handled , Mickey knew , if he could be brought to make the first move . They were eight feet apart when Roberts cleared the last step . Mickey waited with slack arms . `` Any time , Roberts '' , he said . `` Or would it be easier if I put my hands in my pockets '' ? ? The taunt was lost on Roberts . He advanced slowly , directly , giving no hint of a feint to either side . He was just short of arm's reach when he stopped . Mickey backed off two steps , forcing him to come on again . There was a fixed grin on Roberts' face , made hideous by the swollen nose and the smeared blood . Mickey backed off again and Roberts hesitated , then came along . They moved in a series of rhythmic fits and starts , a macabre dance -- two steps back , two steps forward , two steps back . Mickey felt his shoulders come up against the wall beside the heavy slab front door . This was going to be it now , any second , and what he had to remember was to keep his eye on the razor , no matter what , even if Roberts should feint with a kick to the groin , the deadly hand was his exclusive concern . The kick came , sudden and vicious but short . Mickey's guts twisted with the effort , but he kept his eye on the weapon . It moved in a silver arc toward his throat , then veered downward . He hunched his left shoulder into it and slashed at Roberts' forearm with his own , felt the blade slide off his sleeve . Before Roberts could move inside to cut upward toward his face , he slammed his right fist into Roberts' belly . Roberts sagged and slashed at him wildly . Ducking , Mickey tripped and fell to one side , landing heavily on the wood floor . Then Roberts was on him , gasping for breath and for a couple of seconds Mickey lost sight of the blade . He felt it rip at the side of his jacket and a momentary sting under his left ribs . He got a knee up into Roberts' belly , used both hands and heaved him clear , then scrambled to his feet . They were in the center of the lobby now . Still clutching the razor , Roberts came up into a crouch , shaking his head . When he charged Mickey was ready . He hit Roberts with his left fist in the ribs and the razor cut toward him feebly , then wobbled in mid-air . With his right fist , and nearly all his weight behind it , he smashed at the bloodstained face . Roberts careened backward , his back arched , fought for balance and , failing , stumbled against the newel post at the foot of the stairs . The sound of his head striking the solid wood was an ultimate , sudden-end sound . He fell on his side across the lowest step , rolled over once , then lay still . Mickey found himself leaning against the desk , with stiff hands , panting for breath . After a minute he went to Roberts , looked at one of his eyes and felt for a pulse . He couldn't feel any . Roberts appeared to be dead ; ; if not yet , then soon , very soon . Suddenly it was cold in the lobby . 12 It seemed to him that a long time had passed before he decided what to do . Actually it was no more than eight or ten minutes , and the sum of his reasoning came to this : There's no way to take him in now and keep those other two -- Wister and the one who hired the two of them -- from finding out about Roberts and lamming out . The local law here would hold me till they check clear back home , and maybe more than that . They would have to . By then they could never catch up with the others . There's no other way ; ; I'll have to do it myself . He looked at where Roberts lay sprawled on the step . Mickey was sure now he was dead . One thing , he thought , nobody knows about it yet . Only me . He climbed the stairs , went into Roberts' room , found a suitcase and packed as much into it as he could . He left a few things . It didn't have to be perfect . Roberts was a wastrel . Walking away on impulse , he might logically leave behind what it was inconvenient to carry . When he had closed the suitcase he found a rag and moved about the room , wiping carefully everything he might have touched . It took him nearly an hour . He went to the room he had rented and got into his overcoat . He left the rest of his things and returned to the lobby . He set Roberts' suitcase near the front door , went outside and walked back to the garage . He was mildly surprised to find it was snowing . It snowed softly , silently , an undulating interruption of his vision against the night sky . He could feel it on his face and in his hair . He found the key to the Jeep , got it started and warmed it up for five minutes . Then he backed out and swung around to the front drive . He went into the hotel and searched till he found the razor . He put it in his own pocket for safekeeping . He took the suitcase out to the Jeep and put it in the front seat . Then he went back for Roberts . The body was heavier than he had anticipated . He got it onto his shoulder after some work and carried it outside and down to the Jeep . He dumped it into the back and made sure it wouldn't roll out , then returned to the porch and closed the front door , making sure it was unlocked . He drove carefully in the direction of the brief tour they had taken earlier . It snowed continuously , but quietly , evenly . When he reached the dip in the woods , he saw that already the earlier ruts were barely discernible . The Jeep fought its way through the low spot and got onto higher ground . He drove in low gear to the fork in the road and swung as close as possible to the entrance to the abandoned mine . He parked facing it and left the headlights on , but when he started into the tunnel with the suitcase , he found the illumination extended no farther than half a dozen feet into the passage . He went back and got the flashlight , returned to the tunnel and carried the suitcase to the edge of the pit he had found earlier . He tossed the bag into the pit and watched dry dust spray up around it . When the dust settled , he went back to the Jeep and carefully worked Roberts' body onto his shoulder . It wasn't like carrying the suitcase . The soft snow was deceitful underfoot . Twice he nearly fell . Inside the passage , he had to work his way over the fallen timber and nearly collapsed under his clumsy burden . By the time he reached the edge of the pit he was panting and his shoulder and back ached under the drag of the dead weight . He stood looking down for a few seconds , then backed up two or three paces from the edge . There was too much weight casually to toss it away . He could feel himself falling in with it and being unable to get out . It would be a bad place to die . It was a bad place for Roberts to wind up , but Roberts had asked for it . It was too late to worry about that . He knelt slowly and dumped the corpse onto the floor of the tunnel . It was a relief to get rid of the weight . He was shaking with tension and it took him a couple of minutes to get his breath and settle down . Then he got on his knees and rolled Roberts' body toward the edge . It hung momentarily on the point of dropping off . He gave it a strong push , heard it slide , then tumble dryly into the hole . He got to his feet and threw the flashlight beam into the pit . The body lay in an awkward sprawl twelve or fifteen feet below the level of the tunnel floor . Deep enough , he decided . There was little chance anyone would enter this shaft during the winter . The external signs of his approach to it would be covered by the snow , probably by the next day . It wasn't cold enough in the tunnel to preserve the body intact . By spring it would be a skeleton . He made his way back to the Jeep . He had started to back into the turn when he remembered the razor in his pocket . He climbed down , went back into the tunnel and tossed the razor into the pit . It landed on Roberts' sprawled right thigh , poised precariously , then slid off to the ground . He went back once more to the Jeep and started the short drive to the hotel . In the garage he checked the Jeep for signs of the use he had made of it . There were stains here and there and he cleaned them off , using an oiled rag he found on a nail . He wiped the steering wheel and all the places he might have touched the Jeep . He replaced the flashlight where it had been stowed , got into his own car and backed it out of the garage . There were tire marks where it had been , but they were overlapped by others and on the dusty floor would not be noticeable except under close scrutiny . Liz Peabody , he thought , might spend some time grieving for her lost lover , but he doubted that she would launch an investigation . He judged her to be a woman of some pride , though not much sense . Still she would probably have sense enough not to call in the local sheriff to find her boy friend who , apparently , had run away . He put in a call to Cunningham from his hotel room . The maid answered and he decided Nancy must be at work . Jeb cautioned him not to be too hopeful and then , ignoring his own advice , said excitedly , `` But it does sound good . A woman named Lisa who tells nobody anything about herself . That courtyard picture with the same initials '' . `` I'm not exactly jumping up and down with enthusiasm . I'll call you in a day or so '' . On the highway he relaxed and enjoyed the drive over Lake Pontchartrain and along the coast . Gulf Springs was ten miles inland -- more of a quaint old coast town than those along the beach made garish by tourist attractions . He checked into a motel and drove downtown . The courthouse was a white-stucco building minus the customary dome . Instead of the usual straggling privet hedges and patches of bare dirt in most small-town squares , the building was hemmed in by a semitropical growth of camellias and azaleas and a smooth lawn the improbably bright-green shade of florist's grass . He figured his best bet was a call on the sheriff . A clerk in the outer office took him in to Sheriff Carruthers , a big , paunchy man with thick , white hair and a voice with a senatorial resonance which suggested he should be running for higher office . Seated in front of the desk , Hank said , `` I'm looking for some information with very little to go on , Sheriff '' . He explained the background of the case , ending with the tenuous clue which had brought him to Gulf Springs . The sheriff's swivel chair tilted back . `` So you're looking for a woman who married a man who might have lived here a year ago and might have been poisoned . If there was such a person , I'm afraid she got away with it . Pity we don't know more about him . I think the best bet is to go through the society columns of last year and see if any of the grooms match with the obituaries a little later . It'll be a tedious job , but if you want to try it , the old newspaper files are in the basement here in the county supervisor's office '' . `` Maybe the society editor would remember a good-looking out-of-town bride '' . `` That's an idea . Mrs. Calhoun has been society editor here for twenty-five years . The editor says that marriages may be made in heaven , but weddings are made in Mrs. Calhoun's columns . She's the one who decides which wedding is to get the lead space in the Sunday paper and all that '' . He smiled . `` Once , when the editor was just out of the hospital from a gallstone operation , Mrs. Calhoun and the mother of the bride went out to his house and fought it out beside his bed . She'd be sure to remember any bride who was vague about background . She'd have made a great scientist dedicated to tracking down heredity and environment . She'd also remember if the groom died later '' . He stood up . `` I wish you good luck , but please don't dig up too tough a case for me this close to election . If you find out anything , come on back here and we'll get started on it '' . Tracking down Mrs. Calhoun was like trying to catch up with Paul Revere between Lexington and Concord . It turned out that she also sold real estate , cosmetics , and hospital insurance . The wearying trek stretched into the afternoon -- from newspaper plant to insurance office to her house and back to the newspaper , where he found her at five o'clock . She was a large woman with a frizzled gray poodle cut and a pencil clamped like a bit between her teeth while she hunted and pecked on an old typewriter . It took a couple of minutes to run through her various businesses and get down to the one he wanted . `` Last year ? ? Well , I do remember one . From Baton Rouge . Married a man named Vincent Black . I remember her because she didn't want her picture in the paper . First bride like that I've seen in twenty-five years '' . `` What reason did she give '' ? ? `` Said she had a breaking-out on her face -- some sort of allergy -- and none of her old pictures was good enough . I didn't see her till several days later at the wedding , and her face looked like it had never had a blemish on it . But , of course , you couldn't see too well through the veil '' . `` Was her name Lisa Carmody '' ? ? `` Now how in hell would I remember that '' ? ? `` Never mind . I can look it up . Do they still live here '' ? ? `` I think they moved away shortly after they were married . He was a salesman for something or other and must have been transferred . I'm sure it'll be in the files . We usually run a social note when somebody moves away '' . He stood up and thanked her . `` Have they inherited some money or something '' ? ? She asked with a reportorial gleam in her eye . He said vaguely , `` Well , it is a little legal matter , but nothing like that '' . He hurried across to the courthouse and caught the sheriff just as he was leaving . `` Sounds like what you're after '' , he said when Hank had finished . `` Come on , let's hurry down before they lock up for the day '' . In the basement the sheriff took him to a small , dingy office occupied by a tall , thin man informal in rolled-up shirt sleeves . `` Mr. Ferrell Hirey Lindsay , chairman of the board of supervisors . Mr. Ferrell is a private detective , Hirey . Wants to look up something in the newspaper files , so don't lock him in here '' . `` Sure '' , said Hirey . `` I'll just leave the door open . It latches when you close it , so stay as long as you like '' . Carruthers crossed the room to a metal door with an open grillework in the top half . He pulled it open . `` Now don't shut this door . It won't open from inside . Before we built the new jail , we used to keep prisoners in here overnight sometimes when the old jail got too crowded . Hirey treats himself a lot better than we do prisoners . They were a sight more comfortable than the ones in the jail with the cold air from Hirey's air conditioner coming through the grille '' . He walked past the sheriff into a windowless room with shelves full of big , leather-bound volumes from floor to ceiling all around the walls . A metal table and four chairs stood in the center . `` They're all here , back to 1865 '' , Carruthers told him . `` It's all right to smoke , but make sure your cigarettes are out before you leave . And , of course , you know not to take clippings '' . `` I'll leave the air conditioner on for you , Mr. Ferrell '' , said Hirey . `` Don't forget to turn it off and close the door good so it'll latch '' . Hank thanked them and promised to observe the rules . When they had gone , he stood for a minute breathing in the mustiness of old paper and leather which the busily thrumming air conditioner couldn't quite dispel . Chapter fourteen In a tour around the stacks , he found that the earliest volumes began on the left and progressed clockwise around the room . An old weakness for burrowing in records rose up to tempt him . It was , indeed , all here -- almost a century . From reconstruction to moon rockets . But he pulled away from the irrelevant old volumes and walked around to the newer ones . Last year's volume was at the top a couple of inches below the ceiling . Near it was a metal ladder on casters attached to the top shelf . He pulled it over , climbed up , and lifted out the big volume , almost losing his balance from the weight of it . He staggered over and dropped it on the table . Since Mrs. Calhoun remembered only that the marriage had been in the spring , he started to plod through several months . He tried to turn right to the society page in each one , but interesting stories kept cropping up to distract him . At last he found it in the paper of April 2 . It told him little more than Mrs. Calhoun had remembered , stating that it had been a small , modest wedding compared to some of the others . There was a marked contrast in the amount of information on bride and groom . Mr. Black's life was an open book , so to speak , from his birth in Jackson , Mississippi , through his basketball-playing days at L.S.U. and his attainment of a B.A. degree , which had presumably prepared him for his career as district sales manager for Peerless Business Machines . The one line on the bride said she was Miss Lisa Carmody from Baton Rouge . No mention of New Orleans . Hank was beginning to feel sharp concern for Mr. Black . If Mrs. Black was who he thought she was , Mr. Black's Peerless selling days might well be over . Now for their exodus from Gulf Springs . This time the search took twice as long , cutting down on his extra reading , for he had to pick through several columns of one- and two-line social notes in each issue . He found it in the edition of May 15 . The item said Mr. and Mrs. Black had moved to Jackson , his home town -- so the lovely Lisa had been with him a year ago . Next on his program was a call to the Jackson office of Peerless Business Machines to find out if Vincent Black was still with them -- or , more specifically , still with us . He glanced at his watch , saw it was only seven , and decided to indulge his weakness now . For the next hour he scrambled happily up and down the ladder , sharing the excitement of reporters who had seen McKinley's assassination , the Iroquois Theater fire in Chicago , and the Hall-Mills trial . In the middle of the stock market crash , he heard a slight noise in the outer office . He turned around , saw nothing , and decided it must be a mouse . Something else distracted him , yet there was no sound , only tomblike silence . Then he knew it was not sound , but lack of it . The air conditioner was no longer running . He jumped up and turned around to see the metal door closing . It clanged shut as he sprang toward it . He pressed his face against the grille . `` Who's there '' ? ? The light shining through the grille dimly illumined the office beyond -- enough for him to see there was no one there . Then he heard the outer door closing . `` Hey , come back '' , he shouted . He thought it must be some damn janitor or cleaning woman puttering around , figuring that Hirey had gone off and forgotten to turn off everything and lock up . Then the faint beginnings of fear stirred in his mind . Unless he was stone-blind , the person who'd just left couldn't have missed seeing Hank through the open door of the brightly lighted room . And even if he'd somehow missed seeing him , he wouldn't have gone off and left the light on and door open in the file room . Whoever it was had meant to shut him up in here , had followed him and waited till the courthouse and square were deserted . But why ? ? To search his room at the motel ? ? To come back later and kill him after the stores had closed around the square and everybody had left ? ? No , they could kill him just as easy right now . Nobody could hear what was going on in this underground vault . Then he heard it and smelled it -- the steady hissing , the dread , familiar pungency of gas escaping . It must be coming from an upright heater against the far wall in the supervisors' office . Until now , Lilac Gaylor and Lila Kingsley had been like an anagram which he could unscramble at his own pace and choosing . Except for those minutes in her room , he had lost touch with her as a reality . Gaylor's obsession and Cunningham's chimera-chasing reminiscences had mesmerized him into thinking of Lila and Lilac , separately or together , as a legend . They kept drifting apart and merging again in his mind like some minute form of life on a microscope slide . `` Well '' -- said Mr. Skyros . `` I take a little time to think it over '' . It was awkward : very awkward . There would be all the nuisance of contacting someone else to take over . Someone reasonably trustworthy . And Angie would hear about it . And Angie knew -- `` Time '' , said Angie , and he smiled very sweet and slow at Mr. Skyros . `` Not too much time , because I'll be needing some more myself pretty much right away . And I done favors for you , big favor not so long back , didn't I , and I'm right here to take on where Pretty left off . No trouble . I don't want no trouble , you don't want no trouble , nobody wants trouble , Mr. Skyros '' . Dear heaven , no , thought Mr. Skyros , turning away as another man came in . He straightened his tie at the mirror with a shaking hand ; ; the genial smile seemed painted on his face . Angie knew -- Speak of dangerous information ! ! Angie knew too much entirely already . Really he had Mr. Skyros at bay `` Big favor I done you . Acourse there's this deal o' Denny's -- and Jackie's -- kinda hangin' fire , ain't it , maybe you've been kinda worryin' over that . And can't say I blame you '' , said Angie thoughtfully . `` This deal with the ace o' spades . Anything to do with an ace o' spades , bad luck '' . Ace of spades -- a widow , that was what they called a widow , these low-class crooks remembered Mr. Skyros distractedly . All about that Angie knew , too . When things got a little out of hand , they very rapidly got a lot out of hand -- it seemed to be a general rule . All just by chance , and in a way tracing back to poor Frank , all of it , because naturally -- brothers , living together -- and Angie -- Mr. Skyros did not at all like the look on Angelo's regular-featured , almost girlishly good-looking face -- or indeed anything about Angelo . Mr. Skyros was not a man who thought very much about moral principles ; ; he found money much more interesting ; ; but all the same he thought now , uneasily , of the way in which Angelo earned his living -- and paid for his own stuff -- and eyed the soft smile , and the spaniel-like dark eyes , and he felt a little ill . `` Look , my friend '' , he said , `` in my life I learn , how is it the proverb says , better an ounce of prevention to a pound of cure . I stay in business so long because I'm careful . Two weeks , a month , we talk it over again , and maybe if nothing happens meanwhile to say the cops know this and that , then we make a little deal , isn't it '' ? ? `` That's a long while '' , said Angie . `` I tell you , you want to leave it that way , I don't fool around with it . I go over to Castro and get fixed up there . I can't wait no two weeks '' . And Mr. Skyros didn't like Angie , but what with Prettyman and three of his boys inside , and not likely to come out -- And Angie such a valuable salesman , Prettyman said -- All the nuisance and danger of getting in touch with practically a whole new bunch of boys -- Why did everything have to happen at once ? ? Denny said stupidly , `` Why , you ain't turning Angie down , are you , Mr. Skyros ? ? I mean , we all figured -- I guess anybody'd figure -- Angie '' -- Angelo gave him an affectionate smile . `` Mr. Skyros too smart a fellow want to get rid of me '' , he said . `` It's O.K. , Denny , everything's O.K. Ain't it , Mr. Skyros '' ? ? Oh , God , the name repeated over and over , anybody to hear -- Not being a fool , Mr. Skyros knew why . But aside from everything else , it would scarcely be pleasant to have dealings with one who was nominally an underling and actually held -- you could say -- the whip hand . And all because of Domokous ! ! If Mr. Skyros had dreamed of all the trouble that young man would eventually cause -- Of course , there was another factor . Angie worth his weight in gold right now , but these users , they sometimes went down fast . Who knew , Angie might not last long . The sweat broke out on Mr. Skyros' forehead as he realized he had been actually thinking -- hoping -- planning -- perhaps -- Good God above , had not Domokous been enough ? ? He patted Angelo's thin shoulder paternally . `` Now you don't want to go talking that way '' , he said . `` Sure , sure , you're the one take over for Pretty , soon as I get the supply , get started up again , isn't it ? ? You don't need worry , Angelo . I tell you , I know how it is with you , my friend , I sympathize , and I'll make it a special point -- a special favor -- get in touch , and get some stuff just for you . I don't know if I can manage it tonight or tomorrow , but I'll try my best , my friend . You see , you got to remember , we all got schedules , like any business ! ! My man , he won't be around a little while , he just fixed me up with this stuff they took out of the Elite . It's awkward , you see that , isn't it '' ? ? `` Well , that's your business , Mr. Skyros '' , said Angie , and his dreamy eyes moved past Mr. Skyros' shoulder to gaze vaguely out the ground-glass window . `` I appreciate it , you do that . Sure . We don't none of us want no trouble . I'm in a room over the Golden Club on San Pedro , you just ask for me there , you want see me . Or maybe I call you -- tonight ? ? About nine o'clock , I call and see if you got any . A couple decks for me , Mr. Skyros -- and ten-twelve to sell , see , I like to have a little ready cash '' . `` Oh , now , I don't know about that much '' , said Mr. Skyros . `` And you know , Angelo , Pretty , he always keeps it a strict cash basis , like they say '' -- `` Sure '' , said Angie . `` Sure , Mr. Skyros . Fifty a throw , that the deal ? ? Sure . I bring you the cash , say five hundred for ten decks . Never mind how much I cut it , how much I get '' , and he smiled his sleepy smile again . `` Standard deal , Mr. Skyros . You go 'n' have a look round for it '' . `` I do my best '' , said Mr. Skyros earnestly , `` just for you , my friend . This is awkward for everybody , isn't it , we all got to put up with inconvenience sometimes . But I do my best for you '' . He got out of there in a hurry , brushing past another man in the door , mopping his brow . The expedient thing -- yes , very true , one must make do as one could , in some situations . It could all be straightened out later . Not very much later , but when things had settled down a little . After this deal with the Bouvardier woman went through . An ace of spades . He was not a superstitious man , but he felt perhaps there was a little something in that , indeed . He rather wished he had never got into the business , and still -- scarcely to be resisted , a nice little profit with not much work involved , easy money Katya Roslev , who would be Katharine Ross so very soon now , rang up her first sale of the day and counted back the change . She did not notice that the customer seized her purchase and turned away without a smile or a word of thanks . Usually she marked the few who did thank you , you didn't get that kind much in a place like this : and she played a little game with herself , seeing how downright rude she could act to the others , before they'd take offense , threaten to call the manager . Funny how seldom they did : used to it , probably . The kind who came into a cheap store like this ! ! Grab , snatch , I saw that first ! ! And , Here , I'll take this , I was before her , you wait on me now or I don't bother with it , see ! ! This kind of place She'd be through here , just no time at all -- leave this kind of thing 'way behind . Off at noon , and she'd never come back . Never have to . Money -- a lot of money , enough . She'd be smart about it , get him to give it to her in little bills so's nobody would suspect -- maybe couldn't get it until Monday account of that , the banks -- But that wasn't really long to wait . Not when she'd waited so long already . No need say anything at all to the old woman . She had it all planned out , how she'd do . She'd say she didn't feel good on Sunday , couldn't go to church -- there'd be a little argument , but she could be stubborn -- and when the old woman had gone , quick pack the things she'd need to take , all but the dress she'd wear Monday , and take the bag down to that place in the station where you could put things in a locker overnight , for a dime . Then on Monday morning -- or it might have to be Tuesday -- get up and leave just the usual time , and last thing , put the money in an envelope under the old woman's purse there in the drawer . She wouldn't be going to get that for an hour or so after Katya had left , go do the daily shopping . No need leave a note with it , either -- or maybe just something like , Don't worry about me , I'm going away to make a better life . A better life . Escape . It wasn't as if she wanted much . She didn't mind working hard , not as if she figured to do anything wrong to live easy and soft -- all she wanted was a chance , where she wasn't marked as what she was . To be Katharine Ross , and work in a nicer shop somewhere , at a little more money so she could have prettier clothes , and learn ladies' manners and all like that , and get to know different people than up to now , not just the ones like her here , with foreign-sounding names , the ones went to the same church and -- Different place , different job , different people , she'd be all different too . Prettier , she'd do her hair another way ; ; smarter , and wear different kinds of clothes -- she'd be Katharine Ross , just what that sounded like . `` You've give me the wrong change '' , said the customer sharply . `` Think I can't count '' ? ? Katya made up the amount in indifferent silence . She was listening to other voices , out of the future . Some of those vaguely-imagined new , different people . Oh , Katharine's awfully nice , and pretty too , I like Katharine -- Let's ask Katharine to go with us , she's always lots of fun -- Katharine -- Soon , very soon now sixteen Mendoza didn't wake until nearly nine-thirty . It was going to be another hot day ; ; already the thermometer stood close to ninety . Alison was still sound asleep ; ; he made fresh coffee and searched through all the desk drawers for more cigarettes before thinking of her handbag , and found a crumpled stray cigarette at its bottom , which tasted peculiarly of face powder . He left a note propped on the desk asking her to call him sometime today , and drove home . After he'd got out fresh liver for Bast , he paused to look at her crouched daintily over her dish . Surely she was just a trifle fatter around the middle ? ? He seemed to remember reading somewhere that Abyssinians had large litters , and suffered a dismaying vision of the apartment overrun with a dozen kittens . `` Y que sigue despues ? ? -- What then '' ? ? He asked her severely . `` A lot of people are so peculiar that they don't like cats , it's not the easiest thing in the world to find good homes for kittens -- and , damn it , you know very well if I have them around long , impossible to give them away ! ! And I suppose now that you've finally grown up , if a little late , you'd go on producing kittens every six months or so . Yes , well , it's a pity to spoil your girlish figure -- which all those kittens would do anyway -- but I think when you've raised these we'll just have the vet fix it so there won't be any more . I wonder if the Carters would take one . And it's no good looking at me like that '' , as she wound affectionately around his ankles . Maude's long nose unexpectedly wrinkled up . `` Happened to be in the hall ! ! Happened to hear you quarrel about her ! ! Oh , well , you can't really blame Lolotte . She lost her beau to you '' . But she was talking of Emile when she saw the black line of the open door ; ; Sarah remembered it clearly . Maude went on . `` I've got to get busy . Miss Celie's taken to her bed , with the door locked . She opened it an inch and poked out the keys for me to give you . Here '' -- She thrust a bundle of keys strung on a thick red cord into Sarah's hand . `` Not that there's much use in locking up the smokehouse and the storehouse now . Drink your coffee '' -- coffee . `` It's -- cold '' . Maude suddenly looked quite capable of pouring it down her throat . `` I don't want it '' , Sarah said , firmly . `` Oh . Well -- I'll take it down with me as I go '' . Maude swooped up the cup and hiked up her top hoop as if about to take off with a racing start . At the door she turned back , her Roman nose looking very long now and satiric . `` I forgot . Ben and Lucien have gone after them . It's just like that book your Northern friend wrote -- except there aren't any ice floes to cross and no bloodhounds '' . `` I don't know Mrs. Stowe . What can they do if they find them '' ? ? `` They can't do anything . It's silly , childish , running after them like that . I told Ben so . But of course the paterollers won't be of any help , not with everything so upset and that Yankee cavalry outfit they say is running around , God knows where '' . She had swished away , she had been gone for a long time probably when Sarah suddenly realized that she ought to stop her , pour out the coffee , so no one would drink it . But then the so-called coffee was bad enough at best , cold it was all but undrinkable -- especially that cup ! ! She was deeply , horribly sure that Lucien had filled it with opium . She had quarreled with Lucien , she had resisted his demands for money -- and if she died , by the provisions of her marriage contract , Lucien would inherit legally not only the immediate sum of gold under the floorboards in the office , but later , when the war was over , her father's entire estate . She felt cold and hot , sticky and chilly at the same time . Now wait a minute , she told herself , think about it ; ; Lucien is not the only person in this house who could have put opium in that coffee . She had lost a bottle of opium -- but that was on the trip from New Orleans . Or someone had taken it during her first day at Honotassa . Yes , she had missed it after her talk with Emile , after dinner , just before Emile was shot . Rilly or Glendora had entered her room while she slept , bringing back her washed clothes . So somebody else could have come in , too -- then or later while she was out of the room . It would have been easy to identify as opium by its odor . It was not very reasonable to believe that Lucien had procured unprocurable opium and come back to Honotassa with a formed plan to murder her . He didn't even know that she was there . And he certainly couldn't have guessed that she would resist his demand for the gold or that she was not the yielding -- yes , and credible fool he had every right to expect . No , he had been surprised , unpleasantly surprised , but surprised . Then somebody else ? ? Don't question , Rev had said , don't invite danger . Her skin crawled : Lolotte had told Maude that she was in the hall and the door was open . Sarah had begun to tell Lucien of Emile , she had begun to question and a little draft had crept across the room from the bedroom door , open barely enough to show a rim of blackness in the hall . So Lolotte -- or anybody -- could have listened , and that somebody could have already been supplied with the missing bottle of opium . That was not reasonable either . The opium had disappeared before Emile's death and whoever shot him could not by any stretch of the imagination have foreseen Sarah's own doubts and suspicions -- and questions . She began to doubt whether there had been in fact a lethal dose of opium in the cup . So suppose somebody only wished to frighten her , so she would leave Honotassa ! ! That made a certain amount of logic . Added to the argument was the fact that while she might have tasted the coffee if it had been still hot , she might even have drunk some of it , she wouldn't have taken enough to kill her , for she would have been warned by its taste . No . It was merely an attempt to frighten her . She wouldn't go back to New York as Maude suggested ; ; she wouldn't run like a scared cat . But -- well , she'd be very careful . She dressed and the accustomed routine restored to her a sense of normal everyday life . But before she left her room she dug into her big moire bag , took out the envelope holding her marriage contract and the wax seal had been broken . So somebody else knew what would happen to her father's money if she died . Rev had known all along . Rev didn't need to break the wax seal , read the contract and find out . He could conceivably have wished to make sure ; ; Rev loved Honotassa , it was like a part of his breath and body ; ; Rev had stressed the need for money . Rev would never have tried to give her poison ! ! She thrust the envelope back in the bag ; ; there was no point in locking it up in the armoire now , it was like locking the barn after the horse was stolen . And in all likelihood , by now , there was more than one person in the house who knew the terms of her marriage contract . There was no point either in telling herself again what a fool she'd been . She went downstairs and received another curious shock , for when Glendora flapped into the dining room in her homemade moccasins , Sarah asked her when she had brought coffee to her room and Glendora said she hadn't . `` Too much work this morning , Miss Sarah -- everybody gone like that '' -- Sarah swallowed past another kind of constriction in her throat . `` Well , then who brought it '' ? ? `` Miss Maude . She come to the kitchen and say she take it up to you '' . Glendora put down a dish of lukewarm rice . `` Not much breakfast this morning . I don't know what we're going to do , Miss Sarah '' . `` We've got to eat '' , Sarah said , curtly , because a chill crawled over her again . Maude ? ? Glendora flapped away . The rice wasn't dosed with opium , indeed it had no taste at all , not a grain of salt . She ate what she could and went out along the covered passageway , with the rain dripping from the vines . In the kitchen Glendora was despairingly picking chickens . `` Get a basket '' , Sarah told her . `` We'll go to the storehouse '' . Glendora dropped a chicken and a flurry of feathers , and went with her through the drizzle , to the storehouse . Sarah found the right key and unlocked the door . It was a long , low room , like a root cellar , for it was banked up with soil , and vines had run rampant over that , too . It was dark but dry and cool . She doled out what Glendora vaguely guessed were the right amounts of dried peas , eggs , cornmeal , a little salt . The shelves looked emptier than when Miss Celie had shown her the storeroom , and since the men from the Commissary had called ; ; there were certainly now fewer mouths to feed but there was less to feed them with . She took Glendora to the smokehouse , unlocked it and saw with satisfaction there was still a quantity of hams and sides of bacon , hanging from the smoke-stained rafters . They wouldn't go hungry , not yet . And the fields were green and growing . `` Can't you possibly imagine what life is going to be like , here '' ? ? Maude had said . Maude . She sent Glendora back to the house , her basket and her apron laden . She stood for a moment , rain dripping from the trees over her head , thinking of Maude . Maude had the opportunity to take the bottle of opium from Sarah's room . Maude had the cool ruthlessness to do whatever she made up her mind to do . She couldn't see how her death could affect Maude . She couldn't see any reason why Maude would attempt to frighten her . Besides , there was something hysterical and silly , something almost childish about an attempt to frighten her . Maude was neither hysterical nor silly and Sarah rather doubted if she had ever been childish . Yet Maude had suggested that Sarah return to New York . Maude could have shot Emile -- if she'd had a reason to kill him . There was no use in standing there in the drizzle , trying to find a link between Emile's murder and opium in a cup of coffee . She started back for the house , saw a light in the office , opened the door and surprised a domestic little scene which was far outside the dark realm of murder or attempted murder . Rev , George and Lolotte were mending shoes . A lighted lamp stood on the table that dusky , drizzling day . They were all three bent over a shabby riding boot ; ; George had a tack hammer . Lolotte held a patch of leather , Rev steadied something , a tiny brad , waiting for George's poised hammer . George said , `` First thing I do when I get to Vicksburg again , is get me a Yankee '' -- `` With boots on '' , Lolotte laughed softly . Rev looked up and saw her . Lolotte looked up and stiffened . George didn't look up at all . There was no way to know , no way to guess whether any one of them was surprised at Sarah's appearance , believing her to be drugged and senseless -- and just possibly dead . Rev said , `` Come in , Sarah . Reckon you know the news '' . And what news , Sarah thought as satirically as Maude might have said it . Rev's face was suddenly a little fixed and questioning . He turned to George and Lolotte . `` Take your cobbler's shop somewhere else . I want to talk to Sarah '' . Everything in the office , the spreading circle of lamplight , the patch of leather in Lolotte's hands . George poised with the tack hammer , the homely , everyday atmosphere , all denied an attempt at murder . A rush of panic caught Sarah . `` No . Not now . I mean I've got to -- to see to the kitchen . Glendora '' -- Her words jumbled together and she all but ran from the office and from the question in Rev's face . Now why did I do that ? ? She thought as warm , drizzling rain touched her face . She was no schoolgirl , refusing to bear tales . As she reached the kitchen door the answer presented itself ; ; if she told anyone of the opium it must be Lucien , her husband . It might be , indeed it had already proved to be a marriage without love , but it was marriage . So she couldn't choose Rev as a confidant ; ; it must be Lucien . Always provided that Lucien himself had not dosed her coffee with opium , she thought , as coldly and sharply , again , as Maude might have said it . She paused at the kitchen door , caught her breath , told herself firmly that the opium was only an attempt to frighten her and went into the kitchen , where Glendora was eyeing the chickens dismally and Maude was cleaning lamp chimneys . Glendora gave a gulp . `` Miss Sarah , I can't cut up no chicken . Miss Maude say she won't '' . Again the homely , everyday details of daily living refuted a vicious attempt to frighten her -- or to murder her . The homely everyday details of living and domestic requirements also pressed upon her with their immediate urgency . No matter what had happened or hadn't happened , somebody had to see about dinner . She eyed the chickens with , if she had known it , something of Glendora's dismal look and thought with a certain fury of the time she had spent on Latin verbs . `` Not since last night . I didn't think there was any reason to '' . `` Maybe there isn't . Speak to him again anyway . Try talking to some of the fellows he works with , friends , anyone . Try to find out how happy he is with his wife , whether he plays around with women . You might try looking into his wife too . She might have been talking to some of her friends about her husband if they've been having any trouble '' . `` You think Black's the one we're looking for '' ? ? `` Yeah . I think he might be '' , Conrad said grimly . `` Then again he might not '' . `` What a stinking world '' , Rourke said . `` Black is Gilborn's best friend '' . `` I know '' . `` Will you be coming back soon '' ? ? `` I think so . I'm on my way to see the Jacobs woman '' . `` Gilborn's secretary ? ? What for ? ? You don't think Gilborn is the -- '' ? ? `` I don't think anything . I just don't want to go off half-cocked before picking up Black , that's all '' . Conrad interrupted . `` Gilborn says he was in his office all day with her yesterday . I'd like to make sure . Also , it's just possible she might know something about Mrs. Gilborn '' . `` Right . I'll see you later '' . `` Aren't you ever going to go home '' ? ? `` It sure as hell doesn't look like it , does it ? ? I'm telling you , if these corpses ever knew the trouble they put us to , they'd think twice before letting themselves get knocked off '' . `` Remember to tell that to the next corpse you meet '' . Conrad hung up and sat on the small telephone-booth bench , massaging his right leg . He looked at his watch . It was ten minutes before eleven . He wondered how long it would be before they had a signed confession from Lionel Black . Thirty years' experience let him know , even at this early stage , that Black was his man . But he still wanted to know why . It was a cold , windy day , the day after Kitti's death , but Stanley Gilborn paid no attention to the blustery October wind . After leaving Conrad , Gilborn had no destination . He simply walked , not noticing where he was , not caring . He stopped automatically at the street corners , waiting for the traffic lights to change , unheeding of other people , his coat open and flapping . As he walked , he tried to think . Of Kitti . Of himself . Mainly of what Conrad had tried to make him believe . There was nothing coherent about his thinking . It was a succession of picture-images passing through his mind : the same ones , different ones , in no apparent sequence , in no logical succession . The enormity of what Conrad had told him made it impossible for Gilborn to accept , with any degree of realism , the actuality of it . Conrad's words had intellectual meaning for him only . Emotionally , they penetrated him not at all . Whoever he was and your wife were intimate . Gilborn remembered Conrad's exact words . They made sense and yet they didn't . He knew Conrad had told him the truth . It was so . Yet it wasn't so . It wasn't so because it couldn't be so . When Kitti was alive -- and he remembered the pressure of her hand resting lightly on his arm -- she had been the center of his life . She was the sun , he the closest planet orbiting around her , the rest of the world existing and visible yet removed . For fifty-five years he had lived , progressing towards a no-goal , eating , working , breathing without plan , without reason . Kitti had come along to justify everything . She was his goal , she was his reason . He had lived all his life waiting for her . Not once , in the time that he had known her , had he ever considered the possibility , not once , not for one one-thousandth of a second , of her infidelity . He could not consider it now . Not really . And so he walked , aimless again . The walk ended , inevitably , right in front of his hotel building . The doorman began to nod his head automatically , then remembered who Gilborn was , what had happened to him the night before . He looked at Gilborn with undisguised curiosity . Gilborn passed by him without seeing him . He crossed the lobby and rode up in the elevator lost in his own thoughts . In the apartment itself , all was still . The police were no longer there . There was no evidence that anything was different than it had been . Except that Kitti wasn't there . Without taking off his coat , he sat in the blue chair which still faced the closed bedroom door . At last , sitting there , in the familiar surroundings , the truth began to sink in . Who ? ? He felt no anger towards Kitti , no sense that she had betrayed him . Who ? ? She was all he had , everything he had , everything he wanted . Someone had taken her away from him . Who ? ? Where there is a left-hand entry in the ledger , there is a right-hand one , he remembered from his school days . Where there is a victim , there is a killer . Who ? ? Whoever he was and your wife were intimate . He rose from the chair , took off his coat . Quickly , he went into the bedroom . The bed still showed signs of where Kitti had lain . Gilborn stood there for a long time . He looked at the bed unblinkingly . The bed was empty now . Kitti would lie in it no more . He would lie in it no more . Gilborn wondered whether Kitti had lain in that same bed with Who ? ? For thirty minutes , Stanley Gilborn stood there . At the end of the half-hour , racking his brains , thinking over and over again of Kitti , her friends , her past , he left the bedroom . Who ? ? He could think of no answer . Gilborn put on his coat again . Before leaving , he took one last , lingering look at the apartment . He knew he would never see it again . In the street , walking as quickly as he could , Stanley Gilborn was a lone figure . On Blanche Jacobs , Kitti Gilborn's death had a quite different effect . For Blanche , Kitti's death was a source of guilty , but nonetheless soaring , happy hope . In Blanche's defense , it must be said she was unaware of the newborn hope . If anyone had asked her , she would have described herself only as nervous and worried . The figures on the worksheet paper in front of her were jumping and waving around so badly it was all she could do to make them out clearly enough to copy them with the typewriter . She wondered whether Stanley would call . She wanted to be with him , to give him the comfort and companionship she knew he needed . She had skipped her lunch hour in the fear that he might call while she was out . He hadn't . And now she was feeling sick , both from concern about Stanley and hunger . Why hadn't he called ? ? Men , she reflected , even men like Stanley , are unpredictable . She tried to think of his unpredictable actions in the eleven years she had known him and discovered they weren't so many after all . Stanley really was quite predictable . That was one of the things she liked about Stanley . He wasn't like so many other men . The dentist last night , for instance . Dinner and the movies had been fine . He had taken her upstairs to say good night . She had invited him in for coffee . It was in the kitchen , as she was watching the kettle , waiting for the water to boil , that he had grabbed for her . Without warning , without giving her a chance to prepare for it . From behind , he had put his arms on her shoulders , turned her around , and pressed her to him , so close she couldn't breathe . Later , she apologized for the long scratch across his face , tried to explain she couldn't help herself , that the panic arose in her unwanted . But he hadn't understood . When he left , she knew she would never see him again . Stanley wasn't like that . She could always predict what Stanley was going to do , ever since she first met him . Except for that one morning . The morning he walked in to announce to her , blushing , that he was married . She thought she was going to die . She had assumed before then that one day he would ask her to marry him . Blanche couldn't remember when she had first arrived at this conclusion . She thought it was sometime during the second week she worked for Stanley . It was nothing that he said or did , but it seemed so natural to her that she should be working for him , looking forward to his eventual proposal . She was thirty-one years old then . Her mother was already considerably concerned over her daughter's future . But Blanche had been able to maintain a serene and assured composure in the face of her widowed mother's continued carping , had been able to resist her urgings to date anyone who offered the slightest possibility of matrimony . For Blanche , it was only a matter of time before Stanley would propose . It was to be expected that Stanley would be shy , slow in taking such a momentous step . Stanley went along in life , she knew , convinced that he deserved the love and faith of no woman . As a result , he never looked for it . But one day , she expected , he would somehow discover , without her having to tell him , that there was such a woman in the world ; ; a woman who was willing to give him love , faith , and anything else a woman could give a husband . Indeed , there was a woman who , unasked , had already given him love . Unquestionably , Blanche loved Stanley . And then , unexpectedly , Stanley made his announcement . On that first day , Blanche literally thought she was going to die , or , at the very least , go out of her mind . It might have been easier for her if Kitti Walker hadn't been everything that Blanche was not . Kitti was thirty years younger than Stanley , taller than Stanley , prettier than Stanley had any right to hope for , much less expect . Kitti could have married a score of men . There was no reason for her to marry someone like Stanley Gilborn , there was no need for her to marry Stanley . Kitti had come into the office , on somebody's recommendation , because she needed help in preparing her income tax return . Stanley had filled out the return and because , when he was finished , it was close to the lunch hour , he had politely asked Kitti to join him , never expecting her to accept . Blanche knew all this because the door to Stanley's office was open and , without straining too hard , she could hear everything that was said . Stanley had gone out , saying he would be back in an hour . He hadn't come back for over two . After that day , Blanche still didn't know exactly what had happened . There were mornings when Stanley came in late , afternoons when he left early , days when he didn't come in at all . Blanche knew something must be causing Stanley's new , strange behavior but she never once connected it with Kitti Walker . It was too unprecedented . Then , six weeks after the day Kitti first came into the office , Stanley announced he and Kitti were married . Somehow , Blanche managed to cover the stunned surprise and offer her congratulations . That night the two of them left for a week's honeymoon in Acapulco . While they were away Blanche came into the office every morning , running things as she had always run them for Stanley , going through the week in a dazed stupor , getting things done automatically , out of habit . For exactly one week , she was able to continue in this manner . On the morning of Stanley's return , however , her strength left her . Two hours of watching his serenely happy face , listening to his soft humming as he bent over his penciled figures , and Blanche had to leave . She stayed away for ten days . Those ten days were like no others that Blanche had known . Mostly , she stayed in bed . She didn't tell anyone , even her mother , what was wrong . She refused to have a doctor , insisting there was nothing a doctor could do for her . `` Right '' , said the fingerprint man . `` Also , if you're going to believe those prints , you'll have to look for a killer who's a top-grade piano player '' . He demonstrated by playing an imaginary piano , doing a staccato passage with a broadly exaggerated attack . To make it clearer he shifted to acting out , but with no change of manner , the killing of Rose Mallory . His hands snatched at an imaginary bucket , swooping down hard to grab it and coming away with equal snap like a ball that's been bounced hard . In the same way he pantomimed grasping a mantel and bouncing cleanly off that , pressing his hands against the floor and bouncing cleanly off that . He was moving like a ballet dancer , playing for laughs . If Rose Mallory's killer acted this way , catching up with him was going to be a cinch . We'd know him by his stretch pants and the flowers he'd wear twined in his hair . Perhaps if Felix had first come upon us when this boy was not cavorting so gaily up and down the hall outside the murdered woman's apartment , we might have had less trouble convincing Felix of our seriousness . This , you will remember , was still New Year's Day . By the time Felix turned up it was early afternoon , which , one would think , would be late enough so that by then , except for small children and a few hardy souls who had not yet sobered up , it could have been expected that people would no longer be having any sort of active interest in the previous night's noisemakers and paper hats . Felix was the exception . He had retained his hat and his horn , and , whatever fun might still be going , he was ready to join it . That , incidentally , might give you some idea of what Felix was like . After all , he hadn't happened upon us in that second-floor hall without warning . The M.E.'s boys had finished their on-the-spot examination and the body had been removed for autopsy . The meat wagon , therefore , was not out in front of the house any more , but the cluster of squad cars was still there and there was a cop on the door downstairs to screen any comings and goings . There was , furthermore , the crowd of curious onlookers gathered in the street and a couple more cops to hold them at a decent distance . Just put yourself in Felix's place for a moment . You're a taxpayer , householder , landlord . You've been away from home for the New Year festivities , but now the party is over and you come home . Defining sobriety in the limited sense of being free from the clinical symptoms of the effects of alcohol ingested and not yet eliminated from the system , you are sober . You still have your paper hat and you're wearing it , but then , it is an extraordinary paper hat and , in addition to anything else you may be , you are also the sculptor who created that most peculiar dame out in the back yard . It's not too much to assume that you will have a more lasting interest in paper hats than will Mr. Average Citizen . You have your paper horn clutched in your big , craggy fist , and for your entrance you have planned a noisy , colorful and exuberant greeting to your friends and tenants . You find your house a focus of public and police attention . Can you imagine yourself forgetting under the circumstances that you are approaching this startling and unexpected situation so unsuitably hatted and armed with a paper horn ? ? Maybe one could be startled into forgetfulness . You shoulder your way through the cluster of the curious and you barge up to the cop on the door . You identify yourself and ask him what's going on . Instead of answering you , he sticks his head in the door and shouts up the stairs . `` Got the upstairs guy '' , he bellows . `` The owner . Do I send him up '' ? ? Then he turns back to you . `` Go on in '' , he says . `` They'll tell you what's cooking '' . Even then , as you go into the house oppressed by the knowledge that something is cooking and that your house has passed under this unaccountable , official control , could you go on forgetting that you still had that ridiculous hat on your head and you were still carrying that childish horn in your hand ? ? What I'm getting at is that we were fully prepared for Felix's being an odd one . We'd seen his handiwork out in the back yard , and the little his tenants had told us of him did make him sound a little special . We were not , however , prepared for anything like the apparition that confronted us as Felix came up the stairs . He , of course , must have been equally unprepared for what confronted him , but , nonetheless , I did find his reaction startling . If Felix was still wearing the hat and carrying the horn because he'd forgotten about them , he now remembered . He came bounding up the stairs and joined the dance . He adjusted the hat , lifted the horn to his lips as though it were a flute , and fell in alongside our fingerprint expert to cavort with him . Our man stopped dead and glowered at Felix . Felix threw his head back and laughed a laugh that shook the timbers of even that solidly built old house . This was a bull of a man . He was big-chested , big-shouldered and heavy-armed . His face was ruddy and heavy and unlined , and when he laughed he showed his teeth , which were big and white and strong and unquestionably home-grown . I don't remember ever seeing teeth that were quite so white and at the same time quite so emphatically not dentures . His hair had receded most of the way to the back of his neck . He had only a fringe of hair and he wore it cropped short . It was almost as white as his teeth . For a man of his mass he was curiously short . He wasn't a dwarf but he was a bit of a comic figure . A man with so big and so staggeringly developed a torso and such long and powerful arms is expected to stand taller than five feet five . For Felix it was a bit of a stretch to make even that measurement . The man was just this side of being a freak . We waited till he had finished laughing , and that gave us a few moments for taking stock of him . He was dressed in a manner Esquire might suggest for the outdoor man's country weekend . Dark gray sports jacket , lighter gray slacks , pink flannel shirt , black silk necktie . His eyes were clear . He was freshly shaved , and if there had been any alcohol in him we could never have missed detecting some scent of it on the massive gusts of his laughter . Not even a whiff . Eventually he subsided . `` Felix '' ? ? Gibby said . `` Me '' , he said merrily . `` Me , the happy one '' . `` That much Latin we remember '' , Gibby said dryly . `` You always live up to your name , always like this , always making happy '' ? ? `` I try '' , Felix said blithely . `` The world is full of blokes who put their hearts into making the tragic scene . I've never noticed that it improves things any '' . `` Bully for you '' , Gibby said . `` What's the rest of your name '' ? ? `` No rest of it . Felix is all there is '' . `` All there ever was '' ? ? `` The past I leave to historians '' , Felix intoned , demonstrating that he could be pompous as well as happy . `` You live in the present '' ? ? `` In the present '' , Felix proclaimed . `` For the future . Is there any other time in which a man can live '' ? ? `` We '' , Gibby announced , `` are not philosophers . We are Assistant District Attorneys . This gentleman is a police officer . He is a fingerprint specialist . Could your future , your immediate future , be made to include taking us upstairs , giving us a bit of space in which our friend can work , and making available to him your finger tips '' ? ? The happy one could never have looked happier . This was more than joy . It was ecstasy . `` Those lovely whorls '' , he chortled . `` So intricate , so beautiful . Come right along . I love fingerprints '' . He was prancing along the hall , heading for the next flight of stairs . Gibby called him back . `` We're here because of what happened last night '' , he said . `` Past , yes , but important . Since it is important , for the record let's have the full name '' . `` That important '' ? ? Felix asked . `` That important '' . `` Grubb '' , Felix whispered . `` Felix Grubb '' ? ? Gibby asked , not bothering to whisper . `` Shh '' , Felix implored . `` I can't see what would make it necessary for you to know . Nothing could make it necessary to proclaim it to the whole world '' . Obligingly Gibby lowered his voice . `` Felix Grubb '' ? ? He repeated . `` No . Edmund , but not for years . For years it's been just Felix . First thing I did after my twenty-first birthday was go into court and have it officially changed , and this is something I don't tell everybody . That was almost forty years ago '' . Having volunteered that he was a man of about sixty , he bounded up the stairs and with each leap rendered the number less credible . This was a broth of a boy , our Felix , and nothing was more obvious than the joy he took in demonstrating how agile he was and how full of juice and spirit . We followed him up the stairs . The cops would gather up Connor and the foursome on the third floor and bring us those of them who would voluntarily submit to fingerprinting . You may think we didn't need Nancy and Jean , but you always get what you can when you can , and we had no guarantee that a fingerprint record on them couldn't be useful before we were through with this case . Also , if we had excluded the ladies we would have to that extent let the whole world know at least that much of where we stood . The killer , if in our present group , would certainly be interested in knowing that much , and even though with the fingerprint evidence what it was I could see no way he could use this bit of information to improve on his situation , there might always be some way . If you can possibly avoid it , you don't hand out any extra chances . Felix took us into his studio . It was that oddly shaped space at the very top of the house , where ceiling heights had to accommodate themselves to the varying angles of roof slope . At each angle of its pitch a big skylight had been fitted into the roof and all these skylights were fitted with systems of multiple screens and shades . When Felix first opened the door on it , all these shades were tightly drawn and the whole studio was as dark as night . He quickly fixed that , rolling back the shades on some of the skylights and adjusting screens on the others . He flew about the place making these adjustments and it was obvious that what he was doing was the fruit of long experience . None of his movements was tentative . There was no process of trial and error . Starting with the room completely blacked out , as it was when we came in , he unerringly fixed things so that the whole place was bathed in the maximum of light without at any point admitting even so much as a crack of glare . Expecting something more-than-average wacky , I was surprised by what we found . There was no display of either works in progress or of finished work . Here and there on work table or pedestal stood a shape with a sheet or a tarpaulin draped over it . These shapes might have been mad , but there was no telling . They were all completely shrouded . The equipment was solid and heavy and in good condition . Everything was orderly and it seemed to be arranged for the workman's comfort , convenience and efficiency . There were tools about but they were neatly kept . There was no confusion and no litter . Supplies of sheet metal were neatly stacked in bins . Andy did not see the newspapers the next day . Someone on his staff -- he suspected it was Ed Thornburg -- intercepted them and for this Andy was grateful . He finally fell asleep around six in the morning with the aid of a sleeping capsule , a crutch he rarely used , and didn't awaken until early afternoon . Memory flooded him the instant he opened his eyes and the sick feeling knotted his stomach . Outside his window bloomed a beautiful summer day . Presumably the same sun was shining upon little Drew also , and those who had kidnapped him . But where ? ? It was still a very big world , despite all the modern cant to the contrary . Hub was sitting in a chair that blocked the hall door . He was dozing , perhaps the only sleep he'd gotten . He snapped to alertness at Andy's entrance . `` Sorry , Mr. Paxton . Nothing new . Lot of people waiting to see you , though '' . `` Reporters '' ? ? `` Our own people . Questions about the show tonight '' . Hub picked up the telephone . `` Shall I let them know you're awake '' ? ? `` I suppose . How's Lissa , do you know '' ? ? Hub considered . `` Some better . She's got plenty of guts , Mr. Paxton . You want me to call her '' ? ? `` She expecting me to '' ? ? Hub shook his head so Andy told him not to bother . The only reason for contacting Lissa was to comfort or to be comforted . He could not manage the former or expect the latter ; ; they had nothing to give to each other . The omission might look peculiar to outsiders , but Andy could not bring himself to go through the motions simply for the sake of appearances . He had little time to himself , anyway . As the afternoon sped toward evening , the suite saw a steady procession of Paxton aides pass in and out , each with his own special problem . Thornburg arrived with the writers . They had spent the morning revising the act , eliminating all the gay songs , patter and dancing with a view of the best public relations . What remained lacked the original verve but it was at least dignified , as befitting the tragic circumstances . Raymond Fox reported that the orchestra had hastily rehearsed `` Cradle Song '' in case it was needed . Charlie Marble was back and forth on several occasions , first to confer with Andy on the advisability of cancelling the Las Vegas engagement -- they decided it was wise -- and later to announce that a prominent comedian , also an agency client , had agreed to fill the casino's open date . And once Bake slipped in , pale and drawn , last night's liquor still on his breath with some of today's added to it . He asked if there was anything he could do . Andy invented a job to keep him busy , sending him ahead to El Dorado to supervise last minute arrangements . But from Rocco Vecchio , they heard nothing . At last it was time to depart . Hub , nosing about , spotted reporters in the lobby , so Andy was hustled away quietly through the hotel's service entrance in a strange car which Hub had procured somewhere . They succeeded in eluding the curious at the hotel , but there was no chance of avoiding them at the nightclub . El Dorado was surrounded by a mob . They overflowed the parking lot , making progress by automobile difficult . Long before he reached the protection of the stage door , Andy was recognized . Word of his arrival spread through the crowd like a brushfire . They surged around him , fingers pointing , eyes prying . It was not a hostile gathering but Andy sensed the difference from last night's hero-worshippers . They had come not to admire but to observe . `` It's worse inside '' , Thornburg informed Andy . `` Skolman's jammed in every table he could find . Under the heading of it's an ill wind , et cetera '' . Backstage was tomblike by contrast . Andy's co-workers kept their distance , awed by the tragedy . But in his dressing room was a large bouquet and a card that read , `` We're with you all the way '' . It was signed by everyone in the troupe . Andy couldn't help but be touched . He instructed Shirl Winter to compose a note of thanks to be posted on the call board . Bake was waiting to report that Lou DuVol had been sobered up to the point where he could function efficiently . Andy gathered that this had been no small accomplishment . Bake himself looked better ; ; any kind of job was better than brooding . Andy told him , `` Bake , I wish you'd talk to Skolman , see if some kind of p. a. system can be rigged up outside . It's just barely possible with this crowd that the kidnapper wasn't able to get a table . I wouldn't want him to miss the message '' . `` I'll try . Skolman isn't going to like it much , though , giving away what he should be selling '' . Skolman wasn't the only one who didn't care for Andy's scheme . A short time later , Lieutenant Bonner stomped into the dressing room . `` I got a bone to pick with you , Mr. Paxton . It's those damn loudspeakers '' . Andy rolled up the revised script he had been studying . `` What about them '' ? ? `` They're going to louse me up good . My men have been here all afternoon , setting up for this thing '' . Bonner explained that , with the nightclub's cooperation , the police had occupied El Dorado like a battlefield . Motion picture cameras had been installed to film the audience , the reservation list was being checked out name by name , and a special detail was already at work in the parking lot scrutinizing automobiles for a possible lead . However , it was virtually impossible to screen the mob outside , even if Bonner had manpower available for the purpose . `` I want you to have the speakers taken out '' . Andy sighed . `` Seems like we're never going to see eye to eye , Lieutenant . Didn't they tell you what I wanted the p. a. system for '' ? ? `` Sure , I know . But it's such a long shot '' -- `` No longer than yours . What do you expect to get tonight , anyway ? ? You think somebody is going to stand up in the audience and make guilty faces ? ? Or have a sign on his car that says , ' Here Comes the Paxton Kidnapper ' '' ? ? Andy crumbled the script in his fist . `` I can't stop you from doing what you think is right . But don't try to stop me , either '' . `` Someday '' , Bonner said , `` you're going to ask us for help . I can hardly wait '' . `` What you don't understand is that I'm asking for it now '' . But Bonner departed , still full of ill will . He had gotten stuck with a job too big for his imagination ; ; he had to cling to routine , tested procedures . To act otherwise would be to admit his helplessness . But , admit or not , Bonner was helpless . The crime showed too much planning , the kidnappers appeared too proficient to be caught by a checklist . Andy's performance was scheduled for eleven o'clock . He stalled for a half-hour longer , hoping to hear something from Vecchio about the ransom money . Bake and Shirl Winter , on separate telephones , could not reach him at any conceivable location in Los Angeles , nor could they secure any clear-cut information regarding his efforts . Bake cursed . `` The sweaty bastard's probably halfway to Peru with our money by now '' . When no one smiled , he felt constrained to add , `` Just kidding , natch '' . Thornburg popped in to advise , `` Andy , Skolman's sending up smoke signals . You about ready '' ? ? `` What's he complaining about '' ? ? Bake asked . `` They're drinking , aren't they '' ? ? `` No . We got a bunch of sippers out there tonight . I guess nobody wants to pass out and miss anything '' . Thornburg added in a lower voice but Andy overheard , `` They act more like a jury than an audience '' . Andy said , `` Well , I guess we can't wait any longer . Hub , you stick by the stage door . If Rock shows up during the number -- or you hear anything -- give me the signal '' . Shirl Winter said , `` I'll stay on the phone , Mr. Paxton . There's a couple of call-backs I can work on '' . `` You're a sweetheart -- but leave one line open . He may try to phone us '' . Andy passed into the corridor , their `` good lucks '' ! ! Following him . It was what they said before every performance but tonight it sounded different , as if he really needed it . They were right . The act , cut to shreds and hastily patched together during the afternoon , had not been rehearsed sufficiently by anyone . The result had nothing of the polish , pace or cohesion of the previous night . Here's where luck would normally step in . But this was no ordinary show and Andy knew it . Whether he sang well or badly had nothing to do with it . The audience had come not to be entertained but to judge . Twenty-four hours had changed him from a performer to a freak . Within this framework , what followed was strained , even macabre . Eliminating the patter and the upbeat numbers left little but blues and other songs of equal melancholy . The effect was as depressing as a gravestone , the applause irresolute and short-lived . Yet Andy plowed ahead , mouthing the inconsequential words as if they possessed real meaning , and gradually his listeners warmed to him . Their clapping grew more fervent ; ; the evening was still not beyond salvaging , not as a show but for him as a person . The worst was yet to come . As Andy reached the finale of his act , a subdued commotion backstage drew his attention to the wings . Rocco Vecchio -- a perspiring , haggard Vecchio -- was standing there , flanked by two men in the uniforms of armored transport guards . Vecchio was nodding and pointing at the large suitcase he held . Andy felt his heart thud heavily with relief . He waved at Fox to cut off the finale introduction . The music died away discordantly . He drew a deep breath . `` Ladies and gentlemen , in place of my regular closing number tonight , I'd like to sing something of a different nature for you . Ray , if you please -- the ' Cradle Song ' '' . He sensed rather than heard the gasp that swept across the audience . Nor could he blame them . This particular song at this particular time could only be interpreted as the ultimate in bad taste , callous exploitation beyond the bounds of decency . Having no choice , he plunged into it , anyway , holding onto the microphone for support . `` Lullaby and goodnight . '' His voice shook . For the first time in his life he forgot the lyrics midway through and had to cover up by humming the rest . He wondered if the audience would let him finish . They did ; ; though contemptuous , they were still polite . But when he was finally through , their scorn was made apparent . Someone clapped tentatively then quickly stopped . Otherwise , the silence was complete . As the lights came up , Andy could see that a number of patrons were already on their way toward the exit . He stumbled off-stage . `` My God '' , he muttered . `` My God '' . Hub was there to support him . `` It's okay , Mr. Paxton . The money's here , all of it '' . At this moment , all he could think of was what he'd been forced to undergo . `` Did you hear them ? ? Do you know what they think of me '' ? ? `` Bunch of damn jerks '' , Hub growled . `` Who needs them '' ? ? Thornburg patted his arm . `` Sure , Andy , it'll be all right . Nothing broken that can't be mended '' . The words were hollow . Thornburg knew , better than any of them , that a public image was as fragile as Humpty Dumpty . All the king's horses and all the king's men Vecchio shouldered in . `` I got it , Andy . God knows how , but I got it . You'll never believe the places I've been today . I practically had to sign your life away , you'll probably fire me for some of the deals I had to go for , but '' -- Andy nodded dully . `` It doesn't matter , Rock . We've done our part '' . He clutched that knowledge to him as he returned to his dressing room . The usual congratulatory crowd was conspicuously absent ; ; the place had the air of a morgue . Andy had no desire to linger himself but Hub reported that the mob outside was still large despite the efforts of the police to disperse them . His son watched until he got as far as the hall , almost out of sight , then hurried after . `` Dad . Dad , wait '' . He caught up with the old man in the living room . Old man Arthur had put down the suitcase to open the front door . `` Just this one favor , Dad . Just don't tell Ferguson that crazy opinion of yours '' . `` Why not '' ? ? The old man gave the room a stare in leaving ; ; under the scraggly brows the pale old eyes burned with a bitter memory . `` It's the truth '' . `` The Bartlett girl was killed by Mr. Dronk's son . Rossi and Ferguson have been across the street , talking to the kid . They've found some sort of new evidence , a bundle of clothes or something , and it must link the kid even stronger to the crime . Why won't you accept facts ? ? The two kids were together a lot , they were having some kind of teen-age affair -- God knows how far that had gone -- and the kid's crippled . He limps , and the man who hit you and took the cane , he limped . My God , how much more do you want '' ? ? His father looked him over closely . `` You sound like an old woman . You should have gone to work today , 'stead of sneaking around spying on the Dronk house '' . `` Now , see here '' -- `` The trouble with you '' , old man Arthur began , and then checked himself . Young Mrs. Arthur had opened the oven and there was a drifting odor of hot biscuits . The old man opened the door and stepped out into the sunlight . `` Isn't enough time to go into it '' , he finished , and slammed the door in his son's face . Mrs. Holden turned from the window draperies . `` They found something else up there '' , she said half-aloud to the empty room . `` They took it away , overalls or something '' . She walked restlessly across the room , then back to the windows . `` Now they've gone , they didn't come back , and they didn't arrest that Dronk boy '' . She stood frowning and chewing her lip . She was wearing a brown cotton dress , cut across the hips in a way that was supposed to make her look slimmer , a yoke set into the skirt and flaring pleats below . She smoothed the skirt , sat down , then stood up and went back to the windows . `` Why on earth did I send him off to work ? ? There was excuse enough to keep him home that young Mr. Arthur's still over there '' . With sudden energy , she went to the phone and rang Holden's office and asked for him . `` I think you had better come home '' . `` Mae , we're so busy . Mr. Crosson's been on everybody's neck , an order he expected didn't come through and he's '' -- `` I don't care . I want you here . I'm all alone and certain things are going on that look very ominous . I need someone to go out and find out what's happening '' . `` But I couldn't do that , even if I were home '' ! ! His voice grew high and trembling . `` I can't be underfoot every time those cops turn around ! ! They'll they'll think I did something '' . He couldn't see the grin that split her mouth ; ; the teeth that shone into the phone were like a shark's . `` You'll just have to risk it . You can't wander along in the dark , can you ? ? I'd think that you even more than I would be wondering what they're up to . They found some clothes '' , she tossed in . `` What '' ? ? Deliberately , she ignored the yelp . `` Also , that Mr. Ferguson was here . I guess he wants to ask you some questions . I stalled him off . He doesn't expect you until five '' . `` Then I'd better wait until five '' . `` No-o-o . Come home right away '' . She slapped the receiver into its holder and stepped away . Her eyes were bright with anticipation . In his office , Mr. Holden replaced the phone slowly . He rose from his chair . He had to cough then ; ; he went to the window and choked there with the fresh breeze on his face . He got his hat out of the closet . For a moment he thought of going into Crosson's office to explain that he had to leave , but there was now such a pain in his chest , such a pounding in his head , that he decided to let it go . He passed the receptionist in the outer office , muttering , `` I've got to go out for a little while '' . Let her call Crosson if she wanted to , let Crosson raise the roof or even can him , he didn't care . He got into the car . Putting the key into the switch , pressing the accelerator with his foot , putting the car into reverse , seemed vast endeavors almost beyond the ability of his shaking body . Once out in the street , the traffic was a gadfly maze in which he wandered stricken . When he turned into the highway that led to the outskirts of the city and then rose toward home , he had to pull over to the curb and wait for a few minutes , sucking in air and squinting and blinking his eyes to clear them of tears . What on earth was in Mae's mind , that she wanted him up there spying on what the cops were doing ? ? What did she think he could do ? ? He tried to ignore what his own common sense told him , but it wasn't possible ; ; her motives were too blatant . She wanted him to get into trouble . She wanted the police to notice him , suspect him . She was going to keep on scheming , poking , prodding , suggesting , and dictating until the cops got up enough interest in him to go back to their old neighborhood and ask questions . And he knew in that moment , with a cold sinking of despair , a dying of old hopes , that Mae had spread some kind of word there among the neighbors . Nothing bald , open ; ; but enough . They'd have some suspicions to repeat to the police . Though his inner thoughts cringed at it , he forced himself to think back , recreating the scene in which Mae claimed to have caught him molesting the child . It hadn't amounted to anything . There had been nothing evil or dirty in his intentions . A second scene flashed before his mind , the interior of the garage at the new house and the young Bartlett girl turning startled to meet him , the dim dark and the sudden confusion and fear and then the brightness as Mae had clicked on the light . Suppose the cops somehow got hold of that ? ? Well , it hadn't been what it seemed , he'd had no idea the girl was in there . He hadn't touched her . And when he came to examine the scene , there was a certain staginess to it , it had the smell of planning , and a swift suspicion darted into his mind . Too monstrous , of course . Mae wouldn't have plotted a thing like that . It was just that little accidents played into her hands . Like this murder . He leaned on the wheel , clutching it , staring into the sunlight , and tried to bring order into his thoughts . He felt light-headed and sick . There was no use wandering off into a territory of utter nightmare . Mae was his wife . She was married to him for better or for worse . She wouldn't be wilfully planning his destruction . But she was . She was . Even as the conviction of truth roared through him , shattering his last hope of safety , he was reaching to release the hand brake , to head up the road for home , doing her bidding . He drove , and the road wobbled , familiar scenes crept past on either side . He came to a stretch of old orange groves , the trees dead , some of them uprooted , and then there was an outlying shopping area , and tract houses . He had the feeling that he should abandon the car and run off somewhere to hide . But he couldn't imagine where . There was really no place to go , finally , except home to Mae . At the gate he slowed , looking around . Cooper was beside his car , on the curb at the right , just standing there morosely ; ; he didn't even look up . Behind him on the steps of the little office sat old man Arthur ; ; he was straight , something angry in his attitude , as if he might be waiting to report something . Holden stepped on the gas . A new idea drifted in from nowhere . He could go to the police . He could tell them his fears of being involved , he could explain what had happened in the old neighborhood and how Mae had misunderstood and how she had held it over him -- the scene was complete in his mind at the moment , even to his own jerkings and snivelings , and Ferguson's silent patience . He could throw himself on the mercy of the Police Department . It wasn't what Mae would want him to do , though . He was sure of this . Once he had abandoned himself to the very worst , once he had quieted all the dragons of worry and suspense , there wouldn't be very much for Mae to do . At that moment , Holden almost slammed on the brakes to go back to Cooper and ask if Ferguson was about . It would be such a relief . What was that old sign , supposed to be painted over a door somewhere , Abandon hope , all ye who enter here ? ? Why , Holden said to himself , surprised at his own sudden insight , I'll bet some of those people who enter are just as happy as can be . They've worried , they've lain awake nights , they've shook at the slightest footstep , they've pictured their own destruction , and now it's all over and they can give up . Sure , they're giving up hope . Hand in hand with hope went things like terror and apprehension . Good-bye . Holden waved a hand at the empty street . Glad to see you go . He drove into the paved space before the garage and got out , slamming the car door . He looked up and down the street . If Ferguson's car had been in sight , Holden would have walked directly to it . He went to the front door and opened it and looked in . Mae entered the room from the hallway to the kitchen . She had a cup of something steaming , coffee perhaps , in one hand , a fresh piece of toast in the other . She stood there , watching Holden come in , and she put the piece of toast in her mouth and bit off one corner with a huge chomp of her white teeth . `` Mae '' -- `` I've been thinking '' , she said , swallowing the toast . `` Didn't you have an old pair of painting overalls in the garage ? ? You used them that time you painted the porch at our other house . And then you wiped up some grease '' . She had caught him off guard , no preparation , nothing certain but that ahead lay some kind of disaster . `` No . Wait a minute . What do you '' -- `` I've been looking for them , and they're gone . I'm sure they were in the garage up until a couple of days ago . Or even yesterday . You used to paint in them , and then you just took them for rags . The police have them now '' . `` I don't remember any overalls at all '' . `` They were all faded . Worn through at the knees '' . She stood sipping and chewing and watching . `` Green paint , wasn't it ? ? Well , I'm not sure of the color . But you had them '' . `` Mae , sit down . Put down the cup of coffee . Tell me what this is all about '' . She shook her head . She took another bite of toast . Holden noticed almost absently how she chewed , how the whole side of her cheek moved , a slab of fat that extended down into her neck . `` My goodness , you ought to remember if I do . You're going to have to go to the police and explain what happened . Tell them the truth or something before they come here '' . A seeping coldness entered Holden's being ; ; his nerves seemed frost-bitten down to the tips of his tingling fingers and his spine felt stiff and glass-like , liable to break like an icicle at any moment . `` I've never owned any painting overalls . A man with a sketch pad in hand sat with a large pink woman in a small office at the end of a long , dim corridor and made pencil lines on paper and said , `` Is this more like it , Mrs. MacReady ? ? Or are the eyebrows more like this '' ? ? When he had finished with that , he would go to another part of the hotel and say much the same things to someone else , most probably a busboy . `` Begin to look like him now , would you say ? ? Different about the mouth , huh ? ? More like this , maybe '' ? ? Men blew dust on objects in a room on the seventeenth floor of the Hotel Dumont and blew it off again , and did the same in a tiny , almost airless room in a tenement in the West Forties . And men also used vacuum cleaners in both rooms , sucking dust up once more . Men from the Third Detective District , Eighteenth Precinct , had the longest , the most tedious , job . At the Hotel Dumont there had , at the time in issue , been twenty-three overnighters , counting couples as singular . These included , as one , Mr. and Mrs. Anthony Payne , who had checked in a little after noon the day before , and had not checked out together . But Gardner Willings was not included ; ; he had been at the Dumont for almost a week . There was , of course , no special reason to believe that the man or woman they sought had stayed only overnight at the hotel . The twenty-three ( or twenty-two with the Paynes themselves omitted ) provided merely a place to start , and their identification was the barest of starts . With names and addresses listed , verification came next . It would take time ; ; it would , almost inevitably , trouble some water . ( `` I certainly was not at the Dumont last night and my husband couldn't have been . He's in Boston . Of course he's in '' -- ) The Hotel King Arthur across the street provided almost twice as many problems . The King Arthur offered respectable and convenient lodgings to people from the suburbs who wanted to see a show and didn't want -- heaven knew didn't want ! ! -- to lunge anxiously through crowded streets to railroad stations and , at odd hours of night , drive from smaller stations to distant homes , probably through rain or , in November , something worse . The King Arthur was less expensive than the Dumont . The King Arthur had fifty-four overnighters , again counting rooms rather than people . Check the overnighters out . Failing to find what was wanted , as was most likely , check out other guests , with special -- but not exclusive -- attention to those with rooms on the street . ( Anyone active enough can reach a roof , wherever his room may be . ) And know , while all this went on , that there was no real reason to suppose that the murderer had been a guest in either hotel . It was not even certain the shot had been fired from either hotel . There were other roofs , less convenient but not impossible . It is dull business , detecting , and hard on feet . There was also the one salient question to ask , and ask widely : Did you notice anything out of the way ? ? Like , for example , a man carrying a twenty-two rifle , probably with a telescopic sight attached ? ? There was , of course , no hope it really would be that simple . The sniper , whether psychopathic marksman or murderer by intent , would hardly have walked to his vantage point with rifle over shoulder , whistling a marching tune . Anybody carrying anything that might hide a rifle ? ? Long thin suitcase ? ? Or long fat suitcase , for that matter ? ? Shrugs met that , from room clerks , from bellhops . Who measures ? ? But nothing , it appeared , long enough to attract attention . Cases , say , for musical instruments ? ? None noted at the Dumont . Several at the King Arthur . A combo was staying there . And had been for a week . Anything else ? ? Anything at all ? ? Shrugs met that . ( Detective Pearson , Eighteenth Precinct , thought for a time he might be on to something . A refuse bin at the Dumont turned up a florist's box -- a very long box for very long-stemmed flowers . Traces of oil on green tissue ? ? The lab to check . The lab : sorry . No oil . ) Anything at all strange ? ? Well , a man had tried , at the King Arthur , to register with an ocelot . At the Dumont , a guest had come in a collapsible wheel chair . At the King Arthur one guest had had his head heavily bandaged , and another had a bandaged foot and had walked with crutches . There had also been a man who must have had St. Vitus or something , because he kept jerking his head . As reports dribbled in , William Weigand tossed them into the centrifuge which had become his head . Mullins came in . There was no sign of Mrs. Lauren Payne at her house on Nod Road , Ridgefield , Connecticut . The house was modern , large , on five acres . Must have cost plenty . The State cops would check from time to time ; ; pass word when there was word to pass . Weigand tossed this news into the centrifuge . Sort things out , damn it . Sort out the next move . Try to forget motive for the moment . Consider opportunity . Only those actually with Payne when he was shot , or who had left the party within not more than five minutes ( make five arbitrary ) positively had none . The Norths ; ; Hathaway , Jerry's publicity director ; ; Livingston Birdwood , producer of Uprising . They had been with Payne when he was shot , could not therefore have shot him from above . Take Gardner Willings . He had left after the scuffle ; ; had been seen to leave . He would have had ample time to go into a blind somewhere and wait his prey . Consider him seriously , therefore ? ? Intangibles entered , then -- hunches which felt like facts . Willings would ambush , certainly ; ; Willings undoubtedly had . Willings was , presumably , a better than average shot . But -- hunch , now -- Willings would not ambush anything which went on two legs instead of four . Because , if for no other reason , Willings would never for a moment suppose he was not bigger , tougher , than anything else that went on two legs . Ambushes are laid by those who doubt themselves , as any man may against a tiger . Faith Constable had had to `` go on '' from the party and had , presumably , gone on . To be checked out further . Forget motive ? ? No , motive is a part of fact . Nobody in his right mind punishes a quarter-century-old dereliction . Grudges simply do not keep that well in a sane mind . Faith Constable had accomplished much in a quarter of a century . Jeopardize it now to correct so old a wrong ? ? Bill shook his head . Also , he thought , I doubt if she could hit the side of a barn with a shotgun . Lauren herself ? ? She had left the party early , pleading a headache . No lack of opportunity , presuming she had a gun . She might , conceivably , have brought one in in a large-enough suitcase . ( Check on the Payne luggage . ) She might now have taken it away again . Motive -- her husband wandering ? ? Bitter , unreasoning jealousy ? ? Heaven knew it happened and hell knew it too . But -- it happened , almost always , among the primitive and , usually , among the very young . ( Call it mentally young ; ; call it retarded . ) There was nothing to indicate that Lauren Payne was primitive . She did not move in primitive circles . She was young , but not that young . It occurred to Bill Weigand that he was , on a hunch basis , eliminating a good many . He reminded himself that all eliminations were tentative . He also reminded himself that he had an unusual number of possibilities . The Masons , mother or son , or mother and son ? ? Opportunity was obvious . Motive . Here , too , the cause to hate lay well back in the years . But bitterness had more cause to remain , even increasingly to corrode . With the boy , particularly . The boy had , apparently -- if Mrs. MacReady was right in what she had told Mullins -- only in recent months been forced to give up college , to work as a busboy . Seeing the man he blamed for this made much of -- youth and bitterness and -- Bill picked up the telephone ; ; got Mullins . `` Send out a pickup on Mrs. Mason and the boy when you've got enough to go on '' , Bill said . `` Right '' ? ? Mullins would do . A man named Lars Simon , playwright-director , had expressed a wish that Anthony Payne drop dead . He would say , of course , that he had not really had any such wish ; ; that what he had said was no more than one of those things one does say , lightly , meaning nothing . Which probably would turn out to be true ; ; which he obviously had to be given the opportunity to say . A man named Blaine Smythe , with `` y '' and `` e '' but pronounced without them , had been fired at Payne's insistence . He was also , if Pam North was right , a closer acquaintance of Lauren Payne's than she , now , was inclined to admit . He might deny the latter ; ; would certainly deny any connection between the two things , or any connection of either with murder . He would have to be given the opportunity . Mullins ? ? It was evident that Mullins was the man to go . It was evident that a captain should remain at his desk , directing with a firm hand and keeping a firm seat . Bill Weigand was good and tired of the wall opposite , and the crack in the plaster . Let Mullins keep the firm seat ; ; let Stein . When Siamese cats are intertwined it is difficult to tell where one leaves off and another begins . Stilts and Shadow , on Pam's bed , appeared to be one cat -- rather large , as Siamese cats go , and , to be sure , having two heads and two tails . On the other hand , they , or it , seemed to have no legs whatever . Pamela North said , `` Hi '' , to her cats , and added that proper cats met their humans at the door . Of four dark brown ears , one twitched slightly at this . `` All right '' , Pam said . `` I know it isn't dinnertime '' . But at this the one too-large cat suddenly became two cats , stretching . Shadow , the more talkative , began at once to talk , her voice piteous . Stilts , a more direct cat , leaped from the bed and trotted briskly toward the kitchen . Shadow looked surprised , wailed , and trotted after her . The hell it isn't dinnertime , two waving tails told Pam North . It was not , whatever tale was told by tails . Martha presumably would cope . She might be firm . It was most unlikely that she would be firm . They want to be fat cats , Pam thought , and lighted a cigarette and leaned back on a chaise and considered pulling her thoughts together . After a time , it occurred to her that her thoughts were not worth the trouble . A vague feeling that Anthony Payne had had it coming was hardly a thought and was , in any event , reprehensible . Had Faith Constable's explanation of her confidence , so uninvited , been a little thin ? ? That was more like a thought , but not a great deal more . Had that tall dark boy , carrying trays too heavy for him , found what he might have considered adulation of a man he probably hated more than he could bear ? ? And possessed himself -- how ? ? -- of a rifle and killed ? ? Pam found she had no answers ; ; had only a hope . The poor kid -- the poor , frail kid . Some people have luck and some have no luck and that , whatever people who prefer order say , is the size of it . The poor , unlucky -- The telephone rang . Pam realized , to her surprise , that she had been almost dozing . At four o'clock in the afternoon . Two martinis for lunch -- that was the trouble . I ought to remember . Don't pretend . You do remember . You just -- `` Hello ? ? Yes , this is she ? ? What '' ? ? The voice had music in it . Even with words coming too fast , they came on the music of the voice . `` I said I would '' , Pam said . `` They won't talk about who gave the information . Not unless they have to . They don't , Mrs. Constable . Not unless they have '' -- She was interrupted . `` Call this a cry for help '' , Faith Constable said . `` Through a door conveniently unlocked '' , Madden supplemented . `` That damn door '' , said the police chief . `` A gift horse to be viewed with suspicion '' . Madden's dark face wore a meditative look . `` If there was collusion between an outside murderer and a member of the household it would be an elementary precaution to check on the door later . And it makes a very poor red herring for an inside job . Much better to break a cellar window '' . `` Don't forget , there was the hope it would pass for a natural death '' , Pauling reminded him . `` Well , with a house as big as that there must be at least one cellar window that wouldn't be noticed right away unless there was a police investigation '' . `` Yeah . And a pane of glass isn't hard to '' -- The telephone interrupted him . He scooped up the receiver and said , `` Police chief '' , into the mouthpiece , and then , `` Oh yes , Mr. Benson . I was hoping I'd hear from you today '' . With his free hand he pulled a pad and pencil toward him and began to make notes as he listened , saying , `` Uh-huh '' and `` I see '' at intervals . At last he said , `` Well , thank you for calling , Mr. Benson . Although there was no doubt in my mind and we've been handling it as one I'm glad to have it made official '' . He hung up . `` Coroner '' , he said to Madden . `` He's just heard from the pathologist who says Mrs. Meeker apparently died from suffocation '' . Pauling looked at his notes . `` Many minute hemorrhages in the lungs ; ; particles of lint and thread in the mouth and nostrils . Scrapings from the bed linen identical with the lint and thread found in the nasal and oral cavities . No other cause of death apparent . Trachea clear of mucus and foreign objects . Brain examined for thrombosis , clot or hemorrhage . No signs of these , no gross hemorrhage of lungs , heart , brain or stomach '' . He paused . `` That's about it . Oh , the time of death . The duration of the digestive process varies , the pathologist says , but the empty stomach and the findings in the upper gastrointestinal tract indicate that Mrs. Meeker died several hours after her seven-o'clock dinner . Probably around midnight , give or take an hour either way '' . Pauling paused again . `` So there it is '' , he said . `` Not your problem , of course , unless Johnston and the murderer are one and the same '' . They discussed this possibility . However likely it was , Pauling said , he couldn't limit himself to it . He had to look for other prospects , other motives until more conclusive evidence pointing to Johnston came to light . Madden , with his investigation centered on the fraud , said that tomorrow he would go to the Bronx bank through which Mrs. Meeker's checks to Johnston had cleared . Arthur Williams had to be located , they agreed . He might have been in collusion with Johnston on the fraud ; ; he might be Mrs. Meeker's murderer or have played some part in her death . This was Madden's suggestion ; ; the police chief shook his head over it . If Arthur Williams was involved in the fraud or the murder , then he too had another identity . No one the Medfield police had questioned professed to know any more about him than about Johnston . Scholarship applicant ? ? Pauling looked doubtful . Madden explained that he was thinking of an application sent directly to Mrs. Meeker . Then he asked to use the phone and called Brian Thayer , who said that he was just leaving to keep a lunch date but would be home by two o'clock . Madden said that he would see him at two and made another call , this one to Mrs. Meeker's lawyers . Mr. Hohlbein was out for the day , but Mr. Garth would be free at one-thirty . The secretary's tone indicated that an appointment at such short notice was a concession for which Madden should be duly grateful . He inferred that Hohlbein and Garth were high-priced lawyers . He had lunch with Pauling . Promptly at one-thirty he entered Hohlbein and Garth's elegant suite of offices in Medfield's newest professional building . He disliked Garth on sight , conservative clothes and haircut , smile a shade too earnestly boyish for a man who must be well into his thirties , handclasp too consciously quick and firm . Youngish man on the make , Madden labeled him , and was ready to guess that in a correct , not too pushing fashion , the junior partner of the firm had political ambitions ; ; that Mrs. Garth would be impeccably suitable as the wife of a rising young lawyer ; ; that there were three children , two boys and a girl ; ; that she was active in the Woman's Club and he in Lions , Rotary , and Jaycee ; ; and finally , that neither of them had harbored an unorthodox opinion since their wedding day . Madden knew that he could be completely wrong about all this , but also knew that he would go right on disliking Garth . Garth was prepared to be helpful in what he referred to with fastidious distaste as this unfortunate Johnston affair , which would not , he said more than once , have ever come about if Mrs. Meeker had only seen fit to consult Mr. Hohlbein or him about it . Madden regretted not being able to find fault with so true a statement . He asked to see a copy of Mrs. Meeker's will . Garth brought one out . The date , October 8 , 1957 , immediately caught the inspector's eye . `` Fairly recent '' , he remarked . `` Was she in the habit of making new wills '' ? ? `` Oh no . She had reason to change the one she made right after Mr. Meeker's death . Her estate had grown considerably . She wanted to make a more equitable distribution of it among the groups that would benefit the most ; ; particularly the scholarship fund . At the time the will was drawn Mr. Hohlbein mentioned to me how mentally alert she seemed for her age , knowing just what changes she wanted made and so forth '' . Garth hesitated . `` Mr. Hohlbein and I have noticed some lapses since , though . Most of them this past year , I'd say . Even two or three years ago I doubt that she'd have become involved in this unfortunate Johnston affair . She'd have consulted us , you see . She always did before , and showed the utmost confidence in whatever we advised '' . The inspector nodded , doubting this . Mrs. Meeker hadn't struck him as ready to seek anyone's advice , least of all Garth's . With her sharp tongue she'd have cut his pompousness to ribbons . It would have been Hohlbein who handled her affairs . Madden settled back to read the will . He skimmed over the millions that went to Meeker Park , Medfield Hospital , the civic center , the Public Health Nursing Association , the library , and so on , pausing when he came to the scholarship fund . Two millions were added to what had been set aside for it in Mrs. Meeker's lifetime , and the proviso made that as long as Brian Thayer continued to discharge his duties as administrator of the fund to the satisfaction of the board of trustees ( hereinafter appointed by the bank administering the estate ) he was to be retained in his present capacity at a salary commensurate with the increased responsibilities enlargement of the fund would entail . A splendid vote of confidence in Thayer , Madden reflected . Tenure , too . Very nice for him . He went on to personal bequests , a list of names largely unknown to him . Twenty-five thousand to each of the great-nieces in Oregon ( not much to blood relatives out of millions ) ten thousand to this friend and that , five thousand to another ; ; to Brian Thayer , the sum of ten thousand dollars ; ; to the Pecks , ten thousand each ; ; to Joan Sheldon the conditional bequest of ten thousand to be paid to her in the event that she was still in Mrs. Meeker's employ at the time of the latter's death . ( No additional five thousand for each year after Joan's twenty-first birthday ; ; Mrs. Meeker hadn't got around to taking care of that . ) Too bad , Madden thought . Joan Sheldon had earned the larger bequest . Mr. Hohlbein was left twenty thousand , Garth ten . There were no other names Madden recognized . Arthur Williams's might well have been included , he felt . Mrs. Meeker had spent a small fortune on a search for him but had made no provision for him in her will if he should be found after her death , and had never mentioned his name to her lawyers . Madden took up this point with Garth , who shrugged it off . `` Old people have their idiosyncrasies '' . `` This one came a bit high at thirty thousand or more . `` Well , she had a number of them where money was concerned '' , Garth said . `` Sometimes we'd have trouble persuading her to make tax-exempt charitable contributions , and I've known her to quarrel with a plumber over a bill for fixing a faucet ; ; the next moment she'd put another half million into the scholarship fund or thirty thousand into something as impractical as this unfortunate Johnston affair . There was no telling how she'd react to spending money '' . Madden inquired next about the audit of the scholarship fund . There was an annual audit , Garth informed him . No discrepancies or shortages had ever been found . Brian Thayer was a thoroughly honest and competent administrator . His salary had reached the ten thousand mark . His expenses ran another four or five thousand . The lawyer didn't know him very well although he saw him occasionally at some dinner party -- Thayer , like himself , Madden reflected , was the extra man so prized by hostesses -- and found him easy enough to talk to . But he didn't play golf , didn't seem to belong to any local clubs -- his work took him away a lot , of course -- which probably accounted for his tendency to keep to himself . Garth's glance began to flicker to his watch . He said that he had already told the police chief that he didn't know what insurance man had recommended Johnston to Mrs. Meeker . He would offer no theory to account for her murder . The whole thing , his manner conveyed , was so far outside the normal routine of Hohlbein and Garth that it practically demanded being swept under the rug . No doubt Mrs. Meeker had snubbed him many a time and he felt no grief over her passing . Even so , Madden's dislike of the suave , correct lawyer deepened . It would be all right with him , he decided , if his investigation of the fraud , with its probable by-product of murder , led to Garth's door . Motive ? ? Ten-thousand-dollar bequest . At first glance , not much of a motive for a man of his standing ; ; but for all his air of affluence , who could tell what his private financial picture was ? ? The inspector knew as he left that this was wishful thinking . Nevertheless , he made a mental note to look into Garth's financial background . Brian Thayer had a downtown address . He lived in an apartment house not over three or four years old , a reclaimed island of landscaped brick and glass on the fringe of the business district . He occupied a two-bedroom apartment on the fourth floor , using the second bedroom as his office . Airy and bright , the apartment was furnished with good modern furniture , rugs , and draperies . Done by a professional decorator , Madden thought , and somehow as impersonal , as unremarkable as its occupant . In Dunston the rent would run close to two hundred a month ; ; in Medfield , perhaps twenty-five less , not all of it paid by Thayer , who could charge off one room on his expense account . He took Madden into the room he used as an office . It contained a desk , files , a typewriter on a stand , and two big leather armchairs . A newspaper open at stock-market reports lay on one of them . Thayer folded it up and offered a drink . The inspector declined . To begin the interview , he asked if Thayer , with more time to think it over , could add to what he had said the other day about Johnston . Thayer shook his head . `` It's all I think about , too . That and her death . It's still unbelievable that it was murder . For all her domineering ways , I can't conceive of her having had a deadly enemy '' . `` Dammit , Phil , are you trying to wreck my career ? ? Because that's what you're doing -- wrecking it , wrecking it , wrecking it '' ! ! Griffith had confronted Hoag on the building's front steps -- Hoag had been permitted no further -- and backed him against a wrought-iron railing . His rage had built up as he made his way here from the second floor , helped by the quantity of champagne he had consumed . Hoag said , `` I didn't send for you , Leigh . I want the captain in charge . Where is he '' ? ? `` Phil , for God's sake , go away . The undersecretary's in there . I told you there's nothing between Midge and me , nothing . It's all in your mind '' . A couple of sobs escaped him , followed by a sentiment that revealed his emotional state . `` Why , I'm not fit to touch the hem of her garment '' . `` Leigh , get a grip on yourself . It's not about you or Midge . I have some security information about the prime minister '' . Griffith looked at him suspiciously through red-rimmed eyes . `` Not about me ? ? You mean it , Phil ? ? You wouldn't pull my leg , old man ? ? I did get you on the platform this morning '' . `` I'm not pulling your leg . Will you call that captain '' ? ? `` No use , he won't come '' . He peered closely at Hoag in the gathering darkness . `` What happened to your head '' ? ? `` I was hit -- knocked out . Now will you get him '' ? ? `` He says I'm to take the message '' . He stared at Hoag drunkenly . `` Who'd hit you in the head '' ? ? `` It doesn't matter . You get back to the captain and tell him this : Somebody's going to take a shot at the prime minister , and Mahzeer is in on the plot . Tell him under no circumstances to trust the prime minister with Mahzeer '' . Griffith said , `` That's impossible . Mahzeer's the ambassador '' . `` Nevertheless it's true '' . `` Impossible '' . Griffith was trying to clear his head of the champagne fuzz that encased it . `` I'll show you how wrong you are . Mahzeer and the prime minister are alone right now '' . He nodded triumphantly . `` So that proves it '' ! ! Hoag looked terrified . `` Where are they '' ? ? `` Where'd you expect , the john ? ? Mahzeer's office '' . `` Where is that '' ? ? `` Facing us , two flights up . Look , old man , you can't go up . They won't even let you in the front door . So why don't you be a good boy and '' -- Hoag grabbed him by the shoulders . `` Listen to me , Leigh . If you want to spend another day in the State Department -- another day -- you get in there and tell that captain what I told you '' . He bit out the words . `` And you know I can do it '' . Griffith raised placating hands . `` Easy does it , Phil . I was just going . I'm on my way '' . He turned and fled into the house and made his way up the marble stairs without once looking back . On the second landing he paused to look for Docherty , didn't see him , and accepted a glass of champagne . He took several large swallows , recollected that Docherty had gone up another flight , and decided he would be wise to cover himself by finding him . The way Hoag was , no telling what he might say or do . He finished his champagne and climbed uncertainly to the next landing . At the top a uniformed officer blocked further progress . `` Yes , what is it '' ? ? He asked . `` I want Captain Docherty '' . He spotted Docherty coming out of a room at the far end of the corridor and called to him . Docherty said , `` It's okay , Bonfiglio , let him by '' . They walked toward each other . `` Well '' ? ? Griffith said , `` Hoag told me to tell you '' -- he waited until they were close ; ; it was hideously embarrassing -- `` not to let the prime minister be alone with Mahzeer '' . Griffith looked half-crocked to the captain ; ; it would be just like him . `` Why not '' ? ? `` He claims Mahzeer's in a plot to kill the P.M. '' . Docherty went taut : was it possible ? ? Could the ambassador himself be the man on this side the prime minister feared ? ? Not possible , he thought ; ; the prime minister knew who his enemy was here ; ; he wasn't going to allow himself to be led meekly to the slaughter . And if by some wild chance Mahzeer was the man , he wouldn't dare try anything now -- not after Docherty had looked in on the two of them to see that all was well . Docherty was damned if he would make a fool of himself again the way he had earlier over the laundry truck . One more muddleheaded play like that one and they'd be leading him away . Still , this had to be checked out . `` Where'd your friend Hoag get his information '' ? ? He asked . `` Haven't the faintest , Captain '' . `` Would you mind sending him up here ? ? I'd like to talk to him '' . Troubled , he continued along the corridor , poking his head into the next office for a careful look around . But Hoag had not stayed on the front steps when Griffith disappeared into the building . He was unwilling to rely on Griffith's carrying his message , and he had no confidence the police would act on it . If Mahzeer was alone with the prime minister he could be arranging his execution while Hoag stood out here shivering in the darkening street . He would have to do something on his own . But what ? ? The door opened and three men and a woman in a sari swept past him and down the stairs . In the lighted interior he saw other men and women struggling into their wraps . These were the early departures ; ; in half an hour the reception would be over . If Mahzeer was planning to set up the prime minister for Muller he would have to do it in the next few minutes . Hoag descended the stone steps to the street and looked up at the building . Wide windows with many small leaded panes swept across the upper stories . On the second floor he saw the animated faces of the party guests ; ; the scene looked like a Christmas card . On the third floor one of the two windows was lighted ; ; it was framed in maroon drapes , and no faces were visible . This would be Mahzeer's office . He and the prime minister would be back from the window , seated at Mahzeer's desk ; ; they would be going over papers Mahzeer had saved as excuse for just such a meeting . In a minute , or five minutes , the business would be done ; ; Mahzeer would stand up , the prime minister would follow . Mahzeer would direct the prime minister's attention to something out the window and would guide him forward and then step to one side . The single shot would come ; ; Hoag would carry its sound to his grave . Mahzeer , of course , would be desolate . How was he to suspect that an assassin had been lurking somewhere across the street waiting for just such a chance ? ? Hoag turned . Where across the street ? ? Where was Muller waiting with the rifle ? ? Narrow four-story buildings ran the length of the block like books tightly packed on a shelf . Most of them could be eliminated ; ; Muller's would have to be one of the half dozen almost directly opposite . The legation was generously set back from the building line ; ; if the angle of fire were too great the jutting buildings on either side would interfere . Would the shot come from a roof ? ? He ran his eye along the roof copings ; ; almost at once a figure bulked up . But dully glinting on the dark form were the buttons and badge of a policeman . With a cop patrolling the road Muller would have to be inside a building -- if he was here at all , and not waiting for the prime minister somewhere between this street and the terminal building at La Guardia Airport . Hoag crossed the narrow street , squeezing between parked cars to reach the sidewalk . From this side he could see farther into the legation's third-story window , but he saw no faces ; ; the room's occupants were still seated or they had been called into the hallway by an alarmed police captain . If only the latter were true . He walked rapidly along the buildings scanning their facades : one was a club -- that was out ; ; two others he ruled out because all their windows were lighted . That left three , possibly four , one looking much like the next . He climbed the steps of the first and opened the door to the vestibule . He quickly closed it again . He had assumed that all these buildings had been divided into apartments , but this one , from a glance at the hall furnishings , was obviously still a functioning town house , and its owners were in residence ; ; that made it doubtful as the hiding place of a man whose plans had to be made in advance . He went on to the next building and found what he expected -- the mingled cooking aromas of a public vestibule . On one wall was the brass front of a row of mailboxes ; ; there were six apartments . Now what ? ? The names on the mailboxes meant nothing to him . This was senseless -- he had no idea what to look for . He peered in the boxes themselves ; ; all were empty except one , and that one was jammed with letters and magazines . The occupants of Apartment Number 3 were probably away for a few days , and not likely to return on a Friday . Had Muller made the same deduction ? ? Muller was attracted to the lore of mailboxes . He opened the inner door ; ; the cooking odors were stronger -- all over the city , at this hour , housewives would be fussing over stoves . He climbed , as quickly as he could urge his body , up the two unbroken flights to the third floor , pulling himself along on a delicate balustrade , all that remained of the building's beauty . He paused on the landing to steady his breathing and then bent to examine the single door by the light of the weak bulb overhead . Now he was certain : the lock had not yielded to Muller's collection of keys ; ; fresh scars showed that the door had been prized open . It had been shut again , but the lock was broken ; ; he noted with a thrill of fear that the door moved under his touch . What was he to do now ? ? He had thought no further than finding Muller . He realized now he had more than half hoped he wouldn't find him -- that Muller would not be here , that the attempt would be scheduled for somewhere beyond Hoag's control . He could not break in on an armed man . He would have to climb back down to the street and signal a cop . Was there time ? ? His thoughts were scattered by the sharp report of a rifle from the other side of the door . Hoag pushed open the door : at the far end of the long dark room Muller was faintly silhouetted against the window , the rifle still raised ; ; he stood with his feet apart on a kitchen table he had dragged to the sill . He turned his head to the source of the disturbance and instantly back to the window and his rifle sight , dismissing Hoag for the moment with the same contempt he had shown in their encounter at Hoag's apartment . Hoag stretched his left hand to the wall and fumbled for the switch : evil flourishes in the dark . The room was bathed in light at the instant Muller's second shot came . Muller , nakedly exposed at the bright window like a deer pinned in a car's headlights , threw down the rifle and turned to jump from the table ; ; his face wore a look of outrage . A shot caught him and straightened him up in screaming pain ; ; a following volley of shots shattered glass , ripped the ceiling , and sent him lurching heavily from the table . He was dead before his body made contact with the floor . Hoag stumbled back into the hall , leaned against the wall , and started to retch . After Captain Docherty sent Arleigh Griffith for Hoag he was able to complete his detailed inspection of the third floor and to receive a report from his man covering the floors above before Griffith returned , buoyed up by a brief stop for another glass of champagne . The safe at Ingleside District Station stands next to the gum machine in a narrow passageway that leads to Captain Harris's office ( to the left ) , the lieutenant's office ( farther along and to the left ) and the janitor's supply closet ( straight ahead ) . The safe is a repository for three dead flashlight batteries , a hundred and fifty unused left-hand fingerprint cards , a stack of unsold Policemen's Ball tickets from last year , and thirty-seven cents in coins and stamps . Gun set the captain's fifth of Hiram Walker inside the safe before he reported to Lt. Killpath , though he knew that Killpath's ulcer prevented him from making any untoward incursion on Herman Wolff's gift . It was more a matter of tact , and also it was none of Killpath's goddam business . He walked up to the lieutenant's office , leaned wearily against the gun rack that housed four rifles and a gas gun nobody remembered having used and a submachine gun that was occasionally tried out on the Academy Range . He stared at the clerk who sat at a scarred and ancient fumed-oak desk stuffing envelopes . `` Where's the Lieut '' ? ? The clerk wagged his head toward the captain's office . Gun went to the connecting door , which was open , and stood at attention while Orville Torrence Killpath , in full uniform , finished combing his hair . The lieutenant's sparse brown hair was heavily pomaded , and as Killpath raked the comb through it , it stuck together in thatches so that it looked like umbrella ribs clinging to his pink skull . The lieutenant eyed Gun's reflection in the mirror over the washbowl and then glanced back at his own face , moving the comb methodically around his head . Leave me alone , Gun thought . Fight with Sam Schaeffer , fight with the whole damned Bureau . But leave me alone . Because I'm looking for the son of a bitch that killed that old man , and I'm going to get him . If you just leave me to hell alone , Lieutenant . Killpath peered through half-closed lids at his reflection , thrust up his chin in a gesture of satisfaction and about-faced . Gun waited for Killpath to sit down behind the desk near the window . He sat stiff-backed in a chair that did not swivel , though it was obvious to Gun that Killpath felt his position as acting captain plainly merited a swivel chair . The desk before him was in no better repair than the rest of the furniture crowded into the room , including wooden file cabinets with some of their pulls yanked off and a wardrobe stained with the roof seepage of countless seasons . Killpath pulled one thin leg up , clamping his arms around the shinbone to press his knee into an incredibly scrawny gut . It was the posture which the men had come to recognize as that of Killpath defying his ulcer . He put his chin on his kneecap , stretching his neck like that of a turkey on a chopping block , and stared wordlessly at his sergeant . Gun waited . The 7:45 bell rang and he could hear the outside doors bang shut , closing in the assembled day watch . Finally , Orville intoned through his hawk nose , `` We can't have people running in any time they please , Sergeant '' . `` No , sir '' . `` Running in , running out . Can't have it . Makes for confusion and congestion '' . He rocked back in the chair , knee locked against stomach , his beady eyes fixed on Matson . He was silent again , possibly listening to the sounds in the squadroom . Roll was being called . Gun cleared his throat . Killpath said , `` You were expected to report to my office twenty minutes ago , Sergeant . That's not getting all the juice out of the orange , now is it '' ? ? `` No , sir '' . Then Killpath smiled . Gun knew that nothing but aces back to back would give the lieutenant an ulcer and a smile at the same time . The day-watch platoon commander , Lt. Rinker , was calling out the beat assignments , but Matson couldn't make the names mean anything . `` I called the station at three this morning '' , Killpath's nasal voice pronounced . `` Do you have any idea who might have been in charge at the time '' ? ? `` Sergeant Vaughn , sir '' . `` Now , now , you're just guessing , Sergeant '' . He smiled thinly , savoring his joke . `` What if I said nobody was here but a couple of patrolmen '' ? ? `` Sir , Vaughn knows better than to leave the station without a relief . He must have '' -- `` He let a patrolman take over the duties of the station keeper . Now that's not regulation , is it '' ? ? `` No , sir '' . `` But you didn't know a thing about it , did you '' ? ? Killpath leaned forward ; ; his foot slipped off the chair and he put it back again , frowning now . `` That's not taking one's command with a responsible attitude , Matson '' . Gun told himself that the old bastard was a fool . But stupidity was no consolation when it had rank . `` I was out in the district , sir '' . `` Oh , yes . So I have heard '' . He stretched a pale hand out to the scattered papers on his desk . `` I might point out that your inability to report to my office this morning when you were instructed to do so has not ah limited my knowledge of your activities as you may have hoped '' . He took up a white sheet of paper , dark with single-spaced data . A car pulled into the driveway outside the window . Gun knew it was Car 12 , the wagon , returned from delivering Ingleside's drunk-and-disorderlies to the City Jail . But for some fool reason he couldn't remember which men he'd put on the transfer detail . He stared at the report in Killpath's hand , sure it was written by Accacia -- just as sure as if he'd submitted it in his scrawled longhand . He sucked in his breath and kept quiet while Killpath laid down the sheet again , wound the gold-wire stems of his glasses around his ears and then , eying the report as it lay before him on the desk , intoned , `` Acting Lieutenant Gunnar Matson one failed to see that the station keeper was properly relieved two absented himself throughout the entire watch without checking on the station's activities or the whereabouts of his section sergeants three permitted members of the Homicide Detail of the Inspector's Bureau to arrogate for their own convenience a patrolman who was thereby prevented from carrying on his proper assignment four failed to notify the station commander Acting Captain O. T. Killpath of a homicide occurring in the district five frequented extralegal establishments known as after-hours spots for purposes of an unofficial and purportedly social nature and six '' -- he leaned back and peeled off his glasses `` -- failed to co-operate with the Acting Captain by returning promptly when so ordered . What have you to say to that , Sergeant '' ? ? Killpath sailed the paper across the desk , but Matson didn't pick it up or even glance at it . `` Well '' ? ? `` I didn't think Accacia knew so many big words , Lieutenant '' . Killpath licked his lips . `` Patrolman Accacia is an alert and conscientious law-enforcement officer . I don't think his diligence mitigates your negligence , Matson '' . `` Negligence , hell '' ! ! Gun held his breath a moment , pushing the volume and pitch of his voice down under the trapdoor in his throat . `` Sir . I would have been negligent and a goddam lousy cop to boot , if I'd sat around this station all night when somebody got away with murder in my district . It's too bad I didn't call you , and it's too bad I let Schaeffer use Accacia when he could have had a boy who'd be glad to learn something of Homicide procedure . But I'm not one damned bit sorry I went out to question the people I know in the places they hang around , and '' -- `` Let's not push our patience beyond the danger line , Sergeant '' , Killpath nasaled . `` I shouldn't like to have to write you up for insubordination as well as dereliction of duty '' . Gun stiffened , his hands balling into fists at his sides . He clamped his jaws to keep the fury from spilling out . An argument with Orville Torrence Killpath was as frustrating and as futile as a cap pistol on a firing range . Killpath leaned forward again , rocked comfortably with his arms still wrapped around one knee . `` Let's just remember , Sergeant , that we must all carry our own umbrella . A district station can't run smoothly , unless '' -- He interrupted himself , looking around Gun at the doorway . `` Morning , Lieutenant Rinker '' . `` Sorry , Orville . I thought you hadn't come in yet '' . `` I've been here for some time '' . He stood up , cocked his head and eyed Gun coldly . `` The sergeant is just leaving '' . It had come as no great surprise to Matson that the hot water in the showers didn't work , that Loren Severe had thrown up all over the stairs , or that some thieving bastard of a cop had walked off with his cigarettes . It was the best he could hope for on a watch that had ended with a session in Killpath's office . Now , as he passed the open counter that divided the assembly room from the business office , he nodded and said good night to the station keeper and his clerks , not stopping to hear the day-watch playback of his chewing out . Not that he gave a damn what the grapevine sent out about Killpath's little speech on the comportment of platoon commanders . He just didn't want to talk about it . If the acting captain wanted his acting lieutenant to sit on his ass around the station all night , Killpath would just have to go out and drag Gun back by the heels once an hour ; ; because he'd be damned if he was going to be a mid-watch pencil-pusher just to please his ulcerated pro-tem captain . At the doorway he squinted up at the gray morning overcast and patted his jacket pockets for the cigarettes , remembering then that he'd left them at the Doughnuttery . He could pick up another pack on his way home , if he were going home . But even before he started across the oiled road to his Plymouth , parked in the lot under the cypress trees across from the station , he knew that he wasn't going home . Not yet . It was nine o'clock in the morning : the hour which , like a spade turning clods of earth , exposed to the day a myriad of busy creatures that had lain dormant in the quiet night . Mission Street at this hour was populated by a whole community that Gun could not have seen on his tour of duty -- the neighborhood that had known Urbano Quintana by day . Then Sol Phillips had purchased the Alliance Furniture Mart seventeen years ago . It was professedly worth three thousand dollars in stock and good will , and the name was written in gold in foot-high letters across each of the two display windows . On the right window , at eye level , in smaller print but also in gold , was Gonzalez , Prop. , and under that , Se Habla Espanol . Mr. Phillips took a razor to Gonzalez , Prop. , but left the promise that Spanish would be understood because he thought it meant that Spanish clientele would be welcome . Language was no problem anyway ; ; Mr. Phillips had only to signal from his doorway to summon aid from the ubiquitous bilingual children who played on the sidewalks of Mission Street . Aside from the fact that business was slow this time of year and his one salesgirl was not the most enterprising , Mr. Phillips had no worries at all , and he said as much to Gun Matson , who sat across from him in civilian clothes , on a Jiffy-Couch-a-Bed , mauve velour , $79.89 nothing-down special ! ! `` She's honest as the day '' , Mr. Phillips said , and added , `` Mr. Gunnar , I can say this to you : Beebe is a little too honest . You can't tell a customer how much it's going to cost him to refinance his payments before he even signs for a loan on the money down ! ! A time plan is a mere convenience , you understand , and when '' -- He interrupted himself , smiling . `` I put her in lamps . That way I don't lose so much '' . `` Why don't you just hire somebody else '' ? ? `` She says she has to finish a story '' . He shrugged . `` I asked her why she couldn't do it tomorrow , but it seems the muse is working good tonight and she's afraid to let it go '' . Casey made some comment , but his mind was busy as he considered the man . His name was George Needham and he , too , had come from a good family . He was perhaps thirty-two , nicely set up , with light brown hair that had a pronounced wave . He was always well groomed and well tailored , and he had that rich man's look which was authentic enough and came from two good prep schools and a proper university . An only child , he had done all the things that young men do who have been born to money and social position until his father double-crossed him by dying broke . Since then he had worked at this and that , though some said his main interest was gambling . All this went through Casey's mind in the first instant , but what held his interest was the fact that these two should be together at all . For he had understood that Betty had been engaged to a boy named Barry Jenkins . She had grown up with young Jenkins , and he had heard that they had been at the point of getting married at least twice . He wanted to ask her about Jenkins now , but he knew he couldn't do so in Needham's presence . And so , still wondering and a little perplexed , he grinned at the girl and spoke lightly to make sure that she would know he was kidding . `` Where did you pick him up '' ? ? `` Oh , I've known him quite a while '' . She glanced at her companion fondly . `` Haven't I , George '' ? ? `` I've been after her for years '' , Needham said , `` but I've never been able to get anywhere until the last few days '' . The girl's eyes were softly shining as she reached out and touched Casey's hand . `` Can I tell you a secret ? ? We're going to get married . Do you approve '' ? ? Casey kept his smile fixed , but some small inner disturbance was working on him as he thought again about Needham , who was eight or ten years older than the girl . He wondered whether Needham was going to swear off gambling and get a steady job or whether he was counting on the income from Betty's estate to subsidize him . None of this showed in his face , and he tried to keep his skepticism in hand . He made a point of frowning , of acting out the part of the fond father-confessor . `` I'll have to give it some thought '' , he said . `` You wouldn't want me to say yes without making sure his intentions are honorable , would you '' ? ? She made a face at him and then she laughed . `` Of course not '' . `` I'll get my references in order '' , Needham said , and though he spoke with a smile , Casey somehow got the idea that he was not particularly amused . `` Stop by any time , Casey '' . He stood up and touched the girl's arm . `` Come on , darling . If you're really serious about working on that story , I'd better take you home '' . Casey watched them go , still frowning absently and then dismissing the matter as he called for his check . As he went out he told Freddie the dinner was perfect , and when he got his hat and coat from Nancy Parks and put a fifty-cent piece in the slot , he told her to be sure that it went toward her dowry . A taxi took him back to the bar and grill where he had left his car , and a few minutes later he found a parking place across the street from his apartment . Because his mind had been otherwise occupied for the past couple of hours , he did not think to look and see if Jerry Burton's car was still there . In fact , he did not think about Jerry Burton at all until he entered his living room and closed the door behind him . Only then , when his glance focused on the divan and saw that it was empty , did he remember his earlier problem . Even from where he stood he could see the neatly folded blanket that he had spread over Burton , the pillow , the sheet of paper on top of it . Then he was striding across the room , his thoughts confused but the worry building swiftly inside him as he snatched up the note . Jack : Look in the wastebasket . I knew the only way I could beat you was to play possum , but it was a good try , kid , and I appreciate it . The wastebasket stood near the wall next to the divan , and the instant Casey picked it up he knew what had happened . The discarded papers inside were sodden , there was a glint of liquid at the bottom , and the smell of whisky was strong and distinct . He put the basket down distastefully , muttering softly and thoroughly disgusted with himself and his plan that had seemed so foolproof . For he remembered too well how he had brought back the loaded drinks to Burton and then returned to the kitchen to get weaker drinks for himself . For another second or two he gave in to the annoyance that was directed at himself ; ; then his mind moved on to be confronted by something far more serious , and as the thought expanded , the implications jarred him . It no longer mattered that Burton had outsmarted him . The important thing was that Burton had gone somewhere to meet a blackmailer with a gun in his pocket . And that gun was empty . Even before his mind had rounded out the idea , he thrust one hand into his trousers pocket and pulled out the six slugs he had taken from the revolver . He considered them with brooding eyes , brows bunched as his brain grappled with the problem and tried to find some solution . He said : `` The crazy fool '' , half aloud . He put the shells on the table , as though he could no longer bear to hold them . He thought : Where the hell could he have gone ? ? How can I find him ? ? There was no answer to this and he began to pace back and forth across the room , his imagination out of control . He tried to tell himself that maybe Burton had sobered up enough to get some sense . Maybe he only intended to scare the blackmailer , whoever he was , in which case an unloaded gun would be good enough . He thought of other possibilities , none of them satisfactory , and finally he began to think , to wonder if there was some way he could reach Burton . Then , as he turned toward the telephone , it rang shrilly to shatter the stillness in the room and he reached for it eagerly . `` Yeah '' , he said . `` Casey '' ? ? `` Yeah '' . `` Tony Calenda '' . Casey heard the voice distinctly and he knew who it was , but it took him a while to make the mental readjustment and control the disturbance inside his head . When he heard Calenda say : `` What about that picture you took this afternoon '' ? ? It still took him another few seconds to remember the job he had done for Frank Ackerly . `` What picture '' ? ? He demanded . `` You took a picture of me at the corner of Washington and Blake about three thirty this afternoon '' . `` Who says so '' ? ? `` One of my boys '' . Casey believed that much . Calenda was not the sort who walked around without one of his `` boys '' close at hand . `` So '' ? ? `` With my trial coming up in Federal Court next week I wouldn't want that picture published '' . `` Who says it's going to be published '' ? ? `` I wouldn't even want it to get around '' . Under normal circumstances Casey was a little fussy when people told him what to do with pictures he had taken . Even so , he generally listened and was usually reasonable to those who voiced their objections properly . Right now , however , he was still too worried about Jerry Burton , and the gun that had no bullets , and the story Burton had told him , to care too much about Tony Calenda . His nerves were getting a little ragged and his impatience put an edge in his voice . `` Look '' , he said . `` I was hired to take a picture . I took it . That's all I know about it and that's all I care '' . `` Maybe you'd better tell the guy who hired you what I said '' . `` You tell him '' . `` All right '' , Calenda said , his voice still quiet . `` But I meant what I said , Casey . If that picture gets around and I find out you had anything to do with it , I'm going to send a couple of my boys around to see you '' . `` You do that '' , Casey said . `` Just be sure to send your two best boys , Tony '' . He hung up with a bang , annoyed at himself for running off at the mouth like that but still terribly concerned with the situation he had helped to create . As soon as he could think logically again he reached for the telephone directory and found Jerry Burton's home number . He dialed it and listened to it ring ten times before he hung up . He called the bar and grill where he had picked Burton up that afternoon . When he was told that no one had seen Burton since then , he thought of three other places that were possibilities . Each time he got the same answer and in the end he gave up . By the time he had smoked three cigarettes he had calmed down . He had done all he could and that was that . And anyway Burton was not the kind of guy who would be likely to get in trouble even when he was drunk . He , Casey , had been scared for a while , but that had come mostly from the fact that he felt responsible . He should have stayed here and watched Burton . He didn't . So he made a mistake . So what ? ? He kept telling himself this as he went out to the kitchen to make a drink . Only then did he decide he didn't want one . He considered opening a can of beer but vetoed that idea too . Finally he went into the bedroom and sat down to take off his shoes . He had just finished unlacing the right one when the telephone rang again . When he snatched it up the voice that came to him was quick and urgent . `` Casey ? ? You don't know me but I know you . If you want a picture get to the corner of Adams and Clark just as fast as you can . If you hurry you might beat the headquarters boys '' . Casey heard the click of the distant receiver before he could open his mouth , and it took him no more than three seconds to make his decision . For over the years he had received many such calls . Some of them came from people who identified themselves . Some telephoned because he had done them a favor in the past . Others because they expected some sort of reward for the information . A few passed along a tip for the simple reason that they liked him and wanted to give him a break . Only an occasional tip turned out to be a phony , and , like the police , Casey had made a point of running down all such suggestions and he did not hesitate this time . He was in his car with his camera and equipment bag in less than two minutes , and it took him only three more to reach the corner , a block from Columbus Avenue . It was a district of small factories and loft buildings and occasional tenements , and he could see the police radio car as he rounded the corner and slammed on the brakes . He did not bother with his radio -- there would be time for that later -- but as he scrambled out on the pavement he saw the filling station and the public telephone booth and knew instantly how he had been summoned . The police car had pulled up behind a small sedan , its headlights still on . Slowly he pulled out the hand throttle until the boat was moving at little more than a crawl , and watched Elaine rapidly spin from one station to another , tune in the null , then draw in a line on the chart . `` We're out just a little too far . Make a 90 degree straight for shore '' . Poet came in , raising his eyebrows appreciatively as he saw Elaine . `` Now '' ? ? He asked . `` Pretty quick '' , she replied . `` Will you drop the anchor '' ? ? Poet nodded , swung below and a moment later emerged from the forward hatch where he picked up the anchor . The rock and roll music coming from the radio station suddenly faded as the boat coasted into the null on the Aj . `` Reverse '' , Elaine said , then peered through the loop of the RDF and waved to Poet . A second later she came behind the wheel and backed off the anchor line until it was set in the ocean floor . She cut the engines and slowly the cruiser swung around on the end of its lines until its bow was pointing into the wind and the cockpit faced toward the shore . Nick watched her somewhat enviously as she efficiently cut the engines , and started the auxiliary motor . Poet came up from below , wearing new bathing trunks . The price tag hung from the belt and he pulled it off as he entered the chartroom and looked at it curiously . Nick wondered if Elaine had bought them , but he said nothing . Nobody , he suddenly realized , was saying anything . It seemed as if they were all under a spell . There should be an excited conversation , for somewhere , directly below them , was a treasure lost for more than four hundred years . But instead of chatter there was a null , like on the radio direction finder . Once , in New York , he had gone flying with some friends in a small private airplane with a single engine . They had all been laughing , joking , when suddenly the engine had failed . No one had screamed . No one had prayed . All had fallen into a complete silence , listening to the wind whistle over the wings . The pilot had been good . He'd landed the plane on a small airstrip in Connecticut and as soon as the aircraft had coasted to a stop , everyone had burst into chatter at the same moment . There had been tension in the plane during the silent descent ; ; a tension similar to the one now . But in the plane there was a concrete reason for it . Now , at this moment , there should be none unless skin diving was much more dangerous than he had been led to believe . Yet tension existed . The same taut-nerved relationship as there had been between the passengers on the plane now strained at the three of them here on the boat . It hung over them like a cloud , its arrival as sudden as a cloud skidding over the sun . Silently , Elaine picked up her keys from the table and went out into the cockpit , Poet behind her , Nick trailing behind him . She threw back a cushion over one of the seats , unlocked a padlock on the chest beneath it , then presently straightened , holding a long knife and a wicked looking spear gun in her hand . Poet whistled softly as he looked at the gun . `` Hydraulic '' ? ? He asked . Elaine nodded . `` They are the best '' . She kicked the locker lid shut and replaced the cushion . `` They are the most efficient '' . `` And the deadliest '' , Poet commented as he buckled on his tank harness . `` Why do you need an arsenal '' ? ? Nick asked , apprehensively , staring at the weapon . `` It's quite possible there's more than codfish down there , man '' , Poet replied with a short , nervous laugh as he held the harness for Elaine . A moment later , moving awkwardly because of the swimming fins , she picked up the gun , handed the knife to Poet , then rolled off the transom of the boat , back first . Poet nodded to Nick and entered the water in a similar fashion . Another moment and they were out of sight , leaving behind only a string of bubbles as a clue to their whereabouts . For a while Nick followed the twisting course of the bubbles , wondering which set came from Elaine . They remained close together , their air trail wiggling like serpents traveling side by side . Eventually the bubbles became lost in the sparkle of the ocean surface , and he rolled over on his back . Clasping his hands behind his head , he stared at the blue sky . There was nothing quite like being alone on a boat on the ocean . Alfredo certainly must have enjoyed being alone . Next to the ocean , probably the loneliest spot was the desert . If Elaine's uncle had stuck to this desire for aloneness , he probably would still be alive . Yet Alfredo wanted money wanted money to roam through the deserts . And Graham wanted money probably to roam among the dice tables in Las Vegas . It was an odd combination a strange pair to stumble upon the wreck of the Trinidad . But Graham hadn't stumbled on it . Two to three weeks prior to the charter of the Virginia , Graham had been snooping around the San Luis Rey Mission . The small helicopter with its two steel skids churned offshore and Nick raised up to watch it heading south . That was a hell of a note , he thought . A couple couldn't even find a secluded spot anywhere on a beach to neck nowadays without someone swooping down upon them . If the character flying that thing had gone over San Clemente Island yesterday he would have had an eyeful . Off to the west a beautiful schooner slowly beat its way into the wind , headed on a tack toward San Clemente . Behind it a cabin cruiser drifted crossways in the small ground-swell , a lone fisherman in the chair aft . The fisherman was right in the middle of the Deep . Nick recalled stories that the two best fishing spots in Southern California were over the La Jolla Deep and the Redondo Deep , two spots where the ocean dropped off to fantastic depths almost from the shoreline . Someday , geologists had warned , the land on both sides of these deeps would fall into the ocean and no more La Jolla or Redondo Beach . Meanwhile , fishermen took advantage of them to pull up whoppers . Sometimes the fish exploded as they neared the surface because of the difference in pressure . Why , he wondered , had Elaine wanted him along on this trip ? ? He couldn't skindive , he couldn't run a boat , except on the open sea . He stood up , stretched , looked around for the bubbles , but could see none . Strolling down to the galley , he lit the butane under the coffee pot and when the brew was heated , poured himself a cup and went up to the chartroom . Turning on the hi-fi , he went back to the cockpit , stretched out on the cushions and listened to the music . Elaine and Poet returned together , popping up over the transom almost like dolphins breaking water . He sat up and watched as they pulled themselves over the stern . `` Any luck '' ? ? He asked . Poet shook his head , sliding his face mask up on his forehead . `` We're right on the edge of the Deep '' , Elaine said . Pulling off her face mask , she carefully placed the spear gun across the stern , then lifted her wet hair from her back and squeezed out the water . `` Which is a break as the area to search is less than a square mile '' , she added as she swung her legs over the transom . `` Any news '' ? ? `` Not a thing '' . He tossed her a towel , then repeated the service for Poet . `` Cigarette '' ? ? Elaine shook her head as she slipped out of her harness , but Poet nodded . His feet still hung over the stern of the transom , but as he reached for the smoke he raised them to swing them in . The fin on his foot caught on the moulding , throwing him off balance . His forearm smashed painfully into the narrow washboard and he grimaced as he grabbed his bruised limb with his other hand and rolled into the boat . `` Kee-reist '' ! ! The word hissed distinctly from Poet's lips as he struggled to his feet . Nick's body became rigid . Turning slowly he saw Poet in a brilliant glare of horror . Poet ! ! His face was still creased in pain as he studied the underside of his arm . Poet a murderer ? ? Turning quickly toward Elaine , Nick saw that she , too , stood in shocked surprise . The sudden silence was too silent . Instinctively aware of the charged atmosphere , Poet raised his head slowly , looking first at Elaine . She had caught the implication of the oath . Her face was frozen into the mask of a mannequin , her body absolutely motionless . And then Nick knew that all of them knew Elaine , himself and Poet . Elaine recovered first , so quickly that Nick thought he might have imagined her sudden reaction . `` Do you need a bandage '' ? ? She asked steadily . Poet rubbed his arm . `` It's like banging a shin '' , he said , his eyes lingered on Nick's face , then moved back to Elaine . `` Hurts like hell for a second , then it disappears '' . `` I'll get some ointment '' . Elaine turned and started toward the companionway . But her walk was too steady , too slow , telegraphing her fear . Nick sensed it . So did Poet . Springing like a cat , he leaped back , swooped up the spring gun and , whirling , pointed it toward the cabin . At the same instant , Nick hit the barrel and threw himself upon the smaller man . The gun fired next to his ear with a vicious whoosh like the first stroke of an old steam engine . At the same instant , Elaine screamed wildly , the sound ending abruptly as Nick went off the boat and into the water on top of the frantic , struggling Poet . The moment the sea closed over Nick , some atavistic sense warned him that he would survive in this alien element only if he did not panic . But the murderer to whom he clung had a tremendous advantage . The wide flippers on Poet's feet gave his legs incredible power , driving the two of them down into the water as they rolled over and over . Poet was the captured , arms pinioned to his side , and he twisted convulsively trying to escape . Poet would escape , Nick thought grimly , because he wore the apparatus which would keep him alive under water . But Nick would not let go . The rubber and glass face mask slipped from Poet's forehead , bounced painlessly off Nick's chin , then disappeared . Poet twisted again and Nick's knuckles scraped on the air tank , ripping off the skin . For a split second , Nick relaxed his grip and Poet's slippery body spun completely around before Nick could stop him , holding him now from the rear . Something flailed at the side of Nick's head as they rolled around and around . Suddenly Poet stopped struggling and the two of them hung suspended in the water , not rising , not sinking . A sharp pain lanced across Nick's chest and a bubble of air escaped from his tortured lungs , joining dozens of others that sailed lazily toward the surface like helium balloons rising into the sky . A black , snake-like object swayed eerily in front of him , spewing bubbles from its flat cobra head . The air hose was free ! ! The discovery struck Nick like a blow . Desperately , Nick flashed one hand up , catching Poet's neck in the bend of his elbow . At the same instant , he grabbed the loose , writhing hose with his other hand and bit down on the hard rubber mouthpiece . Instinctively he exhaled through his nose then sucked in the air from the hose . At once the excruciating pain in his chest stopped and he was seized with a sudden , wild exultation . As if this was a signal , Poet abruptly began to thrash the water and the quick movement slowly made them sink through the water . Relentlessly , Nick held on , sucking on the hose , inhaling the air that belonged to Poet . Poet was not fighting Nick now . Harbor Point sticks out into the ocean like the fat neck of a steamer clam . It's a rich village but not much for action -- too many solid residents , not enough tourists or working stiffs . It's at the far end of the county and the last time I came here was for a hit and run manslaughter -- about seven months ago . Chief Bob Moore looked his same hick-self ; ; a man mountain running to lard in his middle-age . Seeing me he said with real surprise , `` Well , well , ain't we honored ! ! Hardly expected the head of County Homicide up for this murder . You sure climbed fast , Jed . Rookie investigator last summer and now it's Inspector Jed . Took me 19 years to become Chief of our three man police force . Proves a college education pays off '' . His sarcasm was followed by a stupid grin of his thick mouth and bad teeth . `` I guess it helps '' , I said , paying no attention to his ribbing . `` Never could figure out why you ever wanted to be a cop , Jed . You're not only young but well , you don't even look like a police officer . A runt with narrow shoulders and that brush haircut hell , you'd pass for a juvenile delinquent of the hotrod set . In my day the first requirement for a cop was to look like the law , big and tough . Man , when my 275 pounds and six-four comes along , why it's the same as another badge . When I say move , a guy moves '' ! ! `` Don't worry about my being tough , Moore . Also , it's far too early in the day for corny lines like the bigger they come You've had your gassy lecture , let's get to work . Who was the murdered woman Mrs. Buck '' ? ? `` Widow , nice sort of woman . Comfortably fixed . Ran a fair-sized farm . Came to the Harbor as a bride and Don't worry Jed , this one is in the bag . I know the killer , have the only road off the peninsula covered '' . `` Yeah , passed your road block as I drove in '' , I said , sitting on his polished desk . Although Bob dressed like a slob , he kept a neat office . `` Okay , what happened '' ? ? `` About nine this morning Mrs. Buck phones me she's having trouble with one of her farm hands -- money trouble . Colored fellow named Tim Williams -- only hand she has working for her now . Tim come with the migratory workers that follow the crops up from the South last year , but Tim and his wife settled here . Never had no trouble with him before , thought he was a hard worker , hustling around to get a full week's work . Anyway , Julia asks me to . '' `` Julia '' ? ? `` Come on , Inspector , look alive . Julia Buck , the deceased '' , Moore said , slipping me his smug , idiot-grin again . `` Julia asks me to come out at once . But she didn't sound real alarmed you know , like there was any immediate danger . I got there at 9:47 A.M. , found her strangled . I would have come sooner if I'd known . No doubt about Tim being the killer -- I have a witness . Don't know why the County had to send anybody up here . Told them I can handle this '' . `` Yeah , seems you have a nice package , with all the strings tied . Who's '' ? ? `` I'll collar Tim before night '' . `` Who's your witness '' ? ? `` Julia had -- has -- an old Indian woman cooking for her -- Nellie Harris . Probably the last of the original Island Indians . Nellie was in the kitchen , had just come to work , when she heard Tim arguing with Julia in the living room . Swears she recognized his voice , that Tim yelled , ' It's my money and I want it ' ! ! And then rushed out of the house . Then she heard Julia phone me . Nellie went on with her house work -- until I found Julia dead . And before you say it , Nellie ain't near strong enough to have strangled Julia . There's no doubt this Tim sneaked back and killed Mrs. Buck . Another fact : Tim's disappeared -- on the run . But there's no way off the Point except through my road block . Guess you want to see the body -- have her up the street in Doc Abel's office '' . `` Let's see it '' . We walked up Main Street to this big white house , then around to the back . Being the Harbor's sole doctor , Abel was also its Medical Examiner . The corpse was on a table , covered by a sheet . Doc Abel was busy up front with some of his live patients . Pulling back the sheet , I examined the bruises around Julia Buck's once slender throat . Powerful hands had killed her . `` Find any prints '' ? ? Chief Moore shook his big head , seemed lost in thought as he stared at the nude body . Then he said , `` Never noticed it before I mean , when she was dressed but for a woman her age , Julia had a real fine figure '' . I dropped the sheet , glanced at my watch . It was almost one and I hadn't had lunch . Still , I wanted to get this over with , had a lot of paper work waiting in my own office . I told him , `` I want to go see the Buck house '' . `` Sure '' . Walking back down Main Street , I said , `` I saw the Harbor's one squad car at the road block , we'll ride out in my car '' . `` Naw , we'll use mine '' , Moore said , opening the door of a sleek white Jaguar roadster . As I slid in beside him he said , `` Some heap , hey ? ? Got a heck of a buy on this , dirt cheap '' . `` Yeah , it's a real load '' , I told him , looking up the street at my battered Ford . Five racing minutes later we pulled into the driveway of this typical two-story house , and when the Jaguar stopped I managed to swallow . There was a garage and a modern barn in the rear , all of it standing between two large flat fields planted in early potatoes . Everything shouted gentleman farming , the kind of grandfather-father-to-son folding money the Point is known for . The fins of a Caddy were sticking out of the garage , while the inside of the house was a comfortable mixture of old and expensive contemporary furniture . Nellie Harris wasn't old , she was ancient -- a tiny shriveled woman with a face like a tan prune . She was also stone deaf in her right ear . She calmly repeated what Moore had told me . When I asked , `` Why didn't you go into the living room to see how Mrs. Buck was '' ? ? The old gal stared at me with her hard eyes , said , `` She didn't call . I do the living room last . I went up stairs and did the bath and her bedroom -- way I always do in the morning '' . `` Have you any idea what this Tim and Mrs. Buck were arguing about '' ? ? `` Probably wages . Miss Julia was a hard woman with a dollar . Years ago when I asked her to put me in Social Security , so's I wouldn't have to be working now , Miss Julia threatened to fire me -- all because it would mean a few more dollars a year to her '' . `` Did you hear Tim return '' ? ? `` No sir . Nobody came until Chief Moore '' . I drummed on the kitchen table with my pencil . `` Mrs. Buck have any men friends '' ? ? `` Her '' ? ? The wrinkled mouth laughed , revealing astonishingly strong , white , teeth . `` I never see none . But then I wasn't her social secretary '' . `` Was she on friendly terms with other members of her family '' ? ? `` Didn't have no family -- around here . They had a son -- killed in the war '' . I walked into the living room . There didn't seem to be any signs of a struggle . I told Moore , `` Where does Tim's wife live '' ? ? `` I'll take you there . Look Jed , this is an open and shut case and I have to relieve my men at the road block soon . Okay , come on '' . We did 80 miles an hour across a hard dirt road to a cluster of shacks . In late summer migratory workers lived five and six to a room in these . Now they were empty , except for a cottage across the road . Mrs. Tim Williams was about 21 , with skin the color of bitter chocolate , and if you discounted the plain dress and worn slippers , she was startlingly pretty . The inside of their place was full of new furniture , five bucks down and a buck a week stuff , but all of it clean and full of the warmth of a home . Mrs. Williams was both sullen and frightened . She said she didn't know a thing -- Tim had left the house at six in the morning , as usual . She hadn't seen him since . `` Did Mrs. Buck owe him any wages '' ? ? I asked . `` Well , for this week , but they wasn't due 'till Saturday . Listen , Mr. Inspector , no matter what anybody say , my Tim didn't kill that woman ! ! Tim is a good man , hard working . He strong as a bull but gentle as a baby . Even if he angry , Tim wouldn't hurt a woman . He never in his life took a hand to a woman or '' `` We'll get him soon , see what he says '' , Chief Moore cut in . `` Does your husband have a car '' ? ? I asked . `` Got us an old station wagon . Need it for the job '' . I asked a silly question : `` You've no idea where your husband could be , now '' ? ? She shook her head . I knew she was lying . I stood there , staring at her for a moment -- thinking mostly of her beauty and her poverty . Moore said , `` Come on , Jed , I have to get to my men '' . On my way out I told her , `` If you should eh just happen to see your husband , get him to give himself up . He'll get a fair trial . Hiding out like this won't get him anything , except more trouble , or a bullet '' . `` Yes . I'll tell him -- if I see him '' . We made it back to the Harbor in less than four minutes . I tried not to act scared . That Jaguar could really barrel along . I told Moore I was going to eat , get some forms filled out by Doc Abel . Chief Moore said , `` If I don't see you when I return , see you for certain at my road block , Inspector '' . I had a bowl of decent chowder , phoned the Doc and he said he'd leave the death statements with his girl -- in a half hour . Lighting my pipe , I took a walk . The Harbor is a big yachting basin in the summer . Even now , there were several slick cruisers tied to the dock , an ocean-going yawl anchored inside the breakwater . There was a 34 foot Wheeler with Chief Bob's in big gold letters on its stern also tied up at the dock . It wasn't a new boat , about five years old , but fitted with fishing outriggers and chairs . I asked an old guy running a fishing station if the boat was Moore's . He said , `` You bet . Bob Moore is plumb crazy about blue fishing '' . I dropped into the doctor's office , picked up my forms . As I was walking back to the Police Station , which was in the same building with the City Hall and Post Office , I saw Mrs. Tim Williams sneaking into the back of my car . If she moved gracefully , she was clumsy at it . I got into the front seat . She was ' hiding ' on the floor of the back seat , the soft curves of her back and hips -- rousing lines . I drove out of the Harbor , turned off into a dirt road among the scrub pine trees and stopped . I waited a few minutes and she sat up . For another moment we didn't talk , then she began to weep . She mumbled , `` I just know that Chief Moore is out to kill my Tim '' ! ! `` Maybe . I never saw him so anxious before '' , I said , lighting my pipe and offering her a cigarette . `` Of course , it could be because this is his first murder case . You know where Tim is , don't you , Mrs. Williams '' ? ? She puffed on the cigarette slowly , sitting slumped against the back seat ; ; didn't answer . But the police have dropped the case . I want you to go to Pearson City and find out why -- first-hand stuff for your modern crime series . Take the same train Diana Beauclerk took and get there at the same time . Go to the same hotel and occupy the same suite -- 1105 '' . `` Will the hotel rent it so soon after the crime '' ? ? `` Why not ? ? The police have finished with it . Besides , the number of the suite hasn't been published in any newspaper . To the hotel people , you'll just be an innocent tourist who happens to ask for that particular suite '' . `` Still , they may not want to rent it '' . `` That's your headache . Once inside , keep your eyes open '' ! ! `` For what '' ! ! Alec was growing more and more skeptical . `` The police will have gone over every square inch of the place with a fine-tooth comb . The hotel people will have scoured and vacuumed it . Ten to one , it's even been redecorated '' ! ! `` There's always a chance they may have overlooked something '' , returned the chief . `` I'm betting on that chance . Interview the bellboy and chambermaid who waited on Beauclerk . Study the topography of the suite . Soak up local color . Reenact everything Beauclerk did . Try to imagine you're going to be murdered yourself -- between eleven p.m. and one a.m. the night you arrive '' . Alec smirked . `` Cheerful way to spend an evening '' ! ! A sudden thought wiped the smirk from his face . `` Suppose the murderer should return to the scene of the crime '' ! ! The chief's eyes gleamed . He spoke softly . `` That is exactly what I'm hoping for . After all , the murderer is still at large . And the key to the suite is still missing '' . On the train Alec refreshed his memory of the Beauclerk case by reading teletype flimsies -- spot-news stories about the crime sent out by the Pearson City Star , a member of the Syndicate Press . Diana Beauclerk was a second-rate actress living in New York . Two weeks ago she had gone west to Pearson City . Daniel Forbes , her divorced husband , lived there . So did the firm of lawyers who had got her the divorce , Kimball and Stacy . She reached Pearson City at nine p.m. and went straight to the Hotel Westmore . She telephoned the junior partner of her law firm , Martin Stacy , and asked him to call at her hotel that evening . At the time of her divorce Forbes had promised to pay her a lump sum in lieu of further alimony if she remarried . According to Stacy , she told him she was planning to remarry and she wanted him to ask Forbes for the lump sum . Stacy replied that it would bankrupt Forbes , who had just sunk all his money in a real estate venture . Stacy said he left her suite at nine forty-five p.m. . She was in good health and spirits , but still determined to get the money from Forbes . No one saw Stacy leave . No other visitor inquired for her that evening . Next morning she was found dead in her suite with a bullet from a Colt revolver in her brain . According to the medical examiner , she was shot between eleven p.m. and one a.m. . Her door was locked and the key was missing . So was the gun . When Alec finished reading he was sure that either Forbes or Stacy had killed Diana Beauclerk . Forbes had motive and Stacy had opportunity . Find a motive for Stacy or an opportunity for Forbes and the case would be solved . The Hotel Westmore proved to be one of the older hotels in Pearson City , and definitely second-rate . Alec's first impression of the lobby was gloomy , Victorian dignity -- black walnut and red plush , a black and white tiled floor , and Persian rugs . He studied the night clerk as a man measures an adversary . `` I'd like the room I had the last time '' . `` Certainly , sir '' . The clerk was young and limp , with a tired smile . `` Do you recall the number '' ? ? `` It was 1105 '' . The clerk's smile congealed . `` That suite is taken '' . Alec's glance went to a chart of guest names and room numbers hanging on the wall behind the clerk . Opposite the number 1105 stood one word : Unoccupied . The clerk's glance followed Alec's . `` We have better rooms vacant now '' , he babbled . `` Larger and more comfortable . At the same rate '' . Alec's face was dark , blunt , and sulky . He always looked impertinent and he could look dangerous . He was looking dangerous now . He raised his voice . `` Anything wrong with the plumbing in 1105 '' ? ? There was a sudden stillness in the lobby . Two women , who had been chattering like parrots , were struck dumb . A man , lighting a match for his cigar , paused until the flame burned his fingers . Even the bellboys on their bench were listening . The clerk's eyes flickered . `` Of course not '' ! ! `` Anybody with a contagious disease been in there '' ? ? `` No '' ! ! The clerk was almost hysterical . `` It's just that -- well , 1105 is being redecorated '' . `` I don't believe it '' . Alec leaned on the desk , holding the clerk's eyes with his . `` Suppose you tell me the real reason '' , he drawled . `` There might be a story in it '' . `` St-story '' ? ? `` I'm with the Syndicated Press , Feature Service . Either I get the story -- or I get the suite '' . It was blackmail and the clerk knew it . `` There is no story '' , he piped tremulously . `` Front ! ! Show this gentleman to 1105 '' ! ! The stillness persisted as Alec followed a bellboy across the lobby to the elevator . He could feel eyes on his back . He wished it had not been necessary to announce the number of his suite quite so publicly . The corridor on the eleventh floor was dimly lighted by electric globes at intervals of thirty feet . A thick , crimson carpet muffled every footfall . At the end of the corridor Alec noticed a door marked : Fire Stairs . It was a neat setup for murder . The bellboy unlocked a white door numbered 1105 . The room was dark but a neon sign flashed and faded beyond the window . A few snowflakes sifted down through that theatrical red glow , languid as falling feathers . Hastily the boy switched on a ceiling light . The room looked normal and even commonplace . There was no hint of a violent struggle now . Deal furniture with a mahogany finish was neatly arranged as if it stood in the window of a department store . The blue rug was suspiciously bright and new . It had never been stained with blood . Table covers and towels were clean , ashtrays empty and supplied with fresh matches . The mirror over the bureau was a blank eye , round and innocent . Alec played the part of an innocent tourist . `` Is there anything wrong with this room '' ? ? `` N-no '' . The boy dropped his eyes . `` Afraid you'll lose your job if you don't keep your mouth shut '' ? ? The boy raised his eyes . `` Listen , mister . If you want my advice , pack up and take the next train back to New York '' . `` Were you on duty here two weeks ago '' ? ? The boy hesitated . Then , `` I'm not talking . But I wouldn't spend a night in here for a million bucks '' ! ! He was in a hurry to get out of the room . Alec gave him a tip and let him go . Alone , Alec examined the doors . There were three -- one leading to a bathroom , one to the hall , and one to the room next door which was immovable -- locked or bolted on the other side . Alec locked the hall door and put the key with his watch on the bedside table . It was just quarter of nine . As he ranged his belongings on the bureau he noticed a film of white dust on the dark surface of the wood beyond the linen cover . Not gray like the dust that collects in an unused room , but white . Women didn't use white face powder nowadays , he recalled . They used pink , tan , or cream powder . Alec glanced into the bathroom . Blood in the bathtub where the murderer appears to have washed his hands . It seemed clean now , but Alec decided against a bath . He crawled into bed and switched off the light . In the darkness he could see the rosy reflection of the neon sign on the wall opposite the window . It winked as steadily as a metronome -- on , off -- on , off . In less than five minutes Alec was asleep . He never knew just what woke him . Yet suddenly he was wide-awake . There was no sound and apparently no movement in the room except the noiseless pulsation of the red light on the wall . He lay still , listening to the silence , watching the light . Somewhere in the city a big clock sounded twelve solemn notes -- midnight . According to the medical examiner she was shot between eleven p.m. and one a.m. . Alec heard a faint sound . His heart seemed to swell and knock against the wall of his chest . For the sound was inside the room . He let his eyelids droop and breathed heavily , feigning sleep . The sound was coming nearer . A monstrous shadow fell across the illuminated wall , distorted and indefinable . When the neon sign faded out , the shadow disappeared . When the neon sign flashed on , the shadow was still there . It stretched to an impossible height , climbing the wall to the ceiling . That meant that something between the light and its reflection on the wall was moving closer to the source of the light -- in this case , the window . Cautiously Alec tensed his muscles , ready to jump . The bedsprings betrayed him with a creak . The shadow vanished . Someone had moved beyond the range of the light from the window . Abandoning caution , Alec leaped out of bed and groped for the light switch . Before he could snap it on , a stinging blow caught him in the ribs . He lashed out blindly with his right . There was a thick , squashy crack of fist on flesh . Something hard grazed his knuckles . He put everything he had into the next and aimed down where the stomach ought to be . Rough cloth rasped his fist . There was a grunt , curiously inarticulate , like that of an animal in pain . Something heavy shook the floor as it dropped . Alec waited a moment , on guard . Nothing happened . Again he groped for the light switch . The blue rug had been rolled up and stacked in one corner of the room . On the bare floorboards a man lay face down . He had a short , heavy , powerful body . Alec turned him over and discovered a round , lumpy face with narrow , slanting eyes -- a primitive Tartar face from Russia or the Balkans . The man's shoes were too pointed , his overcoat too broad at the shoulders and too narrow at the waist . There was a slight bulge under the left armpit -- a shoulder holster . Alec promptly removed the gun . He was familiar with this type . He had seen it in the lineup at Police Headquarters in New York , in Broadway night clubs and Seventh Avenue pool rooms , in the criminal courts . But he was surprised to meet it here . Diana Beauclerk had no connection with the underworld . A professional gunman would not have killed her with a weapon of such small caliber as a . Nor would he choose a respectable hotel as the scene for a killing when it would be so much safer to take his victim for a one-way ride on a lonely country road . The man's eyelids fluttered . He opened his eyes . `` What are you doing here '' ? ? Demanded Alec . The man made no reply . His eyes were dazed . His lips were bruised and swollen where Alec had hit him . `` Did you kill Diana Beauclerk '' ? ? Alec expected an indignant denial , but there was no response at all . `` Oh , come on , snap out of it ! ! Or I'll turn you over to the police '' ! ! The silence was getting on Alec's nerves . The man opened his mouth , but no words came . Only that curious , animal grunting Alec had heard during their fight . `` Don't you speak English '' ? ? The man opened his mouth wider . A forefinger pointed toward his gullet . Alec leaned forward to look . There were hideous scars inside the throat and the palate was mutilated . In good time I shall get to the distressing actuality , to Red McIver and Handley Walker , to murder and sudden death . But you realize , I am sure , how much old deeds incite to new ones , and you must forgive me if I tell you first of the old ones . It was in 1814 that Abraham Wharf and his sister sat by a meager fire in their house on Dogtown Common , a desolate place even then . He was sharpening his razor . `` Sister '' , said he `` do you think people who commit suicide go to heaven '' ? ? And she answered , `` I don't know , but I hope you'll never do such a thing '' . Without a tremor , `` God forbid '' ! ! He said , and went out and cut his throat in the cave near Granny Day's swamp . What has this to do with the present ? ? Much , I assure you . You must know what gets into people , even such as Red and Handley , before you can tell what comes out of them . They had learned , both of them , about Abraham Wharf . That's why I beg you not to forget him . His ghost is not laid . Red and Handley , God help them , knew the old Dogtown lore ; ; and I knew they knew it , for I'd told them a lot of it . And isn't it true that you get a deeper perception about a man and his motives when you know what it is he knows ? ? Yes , gentlemen , I am getting to the point , to my point . You know the facts ; ; they are set forth in your own newspapers . You want from me the story , but a story is about ' why ' and then , perhaps , about how . The ' when ' you know ; ; yesterday morning . So what I am trying to tell you is the ' why ' -- that is my point -- and that concerns the spirit of the matter . There is an inwardness and a luster to old furniture ( look at that mahogany highboy behind you ) which has a provocative emanation , if I may say so . Places , too , have their haunting qualities . Even people . And my point in this sad story is the spirit of the matter . When you hold the spirit of a thing , then somehow you know the truth -- you know a fake antique from the real thing . And the truth is what you've come for , is it not ? ? Now , Dogtown is one of those places that creeps into the marrow as worms get into old wood , under the veneer . In fact , all the folk who lived on the back of Cape Ann , they are not just like others . There's a different hall-mark on them . There were no witch burnings here because everyone had a witch in the family . Just think of old Granther Stannard who pulled the teeth of Dark Younger ( her real name was Dorcas ) , and because he bungled the job and left two protruding tusks she put such a hex on him that he thought his legs were made of glass . After that he was never known to run or even walk fast . Today Dogtown is the only deserted village in all New England that I know of . There it sits , a small highland , with towns like Gloucester near by ; ; but now it's the most lost and tortured place in the world . Those who lived in that desolation of rocky deformity took on some of the moraine's stony character . Scientists say it is the last spewings of a great glacier , but one rather feels that only a malevolent giant could have piled up those crouching monsters of granite which still seem to preserve a sort of suspended , ominous life in them . We'll walk up there later . It's perhaps a mile from here where we sit . And not one single dwelling left there , though once , in the early eighteenth century , there were close to a hundred houses . ( I myself have identified about sixty sites , from the old maps and registers . A fascinating pursuit , I assure you . ) Even I can remember nothing but ruined cellars and tumbled pillars , and nobody has lived there in the memory of any living man . It is now a sweep of boulders and ledges , with oak , walnut and sumac creeping across the common , and everywhere the ruins and the long , long shadows . That's your setting , and a sinister one . Please get that in your reports . It accounts for so many things . Both Red McIver and Handley Walker lived nearby , almost as near as I do . Red lived at Lanesville , and from his house he could be up on the Common in a half hour's brisk walk ; ; Handley lived further on , at Pigeon Cove . I'd often find one or other of them up around Dogtown sketching . They were both painters , ( They were ? ? They are ? ? What should one say ? ? ) Well , anyhow , Dogtown Common is so much off the beaten track nowadays that only Sunday picnickers still stray up there , from time to time . Sea-road , railroad , lack of water , killed Dogtown . Dead , dead as a brass door nail , and I sometimes feel like the Sexton , for I'm about the last to be even interested . I knew Red and Handley well . As I said , they were both painters . They'd come , separately , to Gloucester some twenty years ago -- there's always been an artists' colony somewhere on Cape Ann -- and each married here . They married cousins , Anta and Freya Norberg . There are a lot of Scandinavians in this neck of the woods , and many still make painted furniture and take steam-baths . Pretty girls among them , with blonde hair and pert faces . Handley married Freya and Red , of the red beard , married Anta . And it was because of an old Norberg inheritance that I got to understand them all so well . The quarrel ended in a ridiculous draw , but I must tell you about it . Oh , yes , I'm quite sure it's important , because of the Beech Pasture . What's that ? ? Why , that's what gave me the feeling , gave me as-it-were the spirit , the demoniac , evil spirit of this whole affair . You see , besides being custodian of antiquities , I am also registrar . No , I don't hold with those who live entirely among dead things . I know as well as the next man that a ship is called from the rigging she carries , where the live wind blows , and not from the hull . But you've got to know both . What's below the water-line interests me also . As I was saying , I've known all about the old records , including the old Norberg deed . Some ten years ago that page was torn out , I don't know by whom . About five years ago , Handley came to ask me if he could see the tattered register . He was courteous and casual about it , as though it were of no consequence . He's always like that , in spite of being a big man . ( When you see him , you'll notice his habit of fingering , I might almost say , stroking a large mole with black hairs on it , by his right temple . ) A sensual man , but very courteous , some would say slick . Like his glossy black hair . Too many outside manners , to my taste . He is the sort who , with an appraising eye , would cross the street to help a strange woman on to a bus and then pinch her . A real gentleman , I feel , would do neither . He's always worn a broad-brimmed hat , and I've noticed , in my small study at the Society , that he rather smells of cosmetics . The next week , cousin Red wandered in as casually , but curt and untidy . Red was small and fine-boned , like ivory-inlay . He too asked to see the same page . When I told him someone had torn it out , he shouted . `` By God , it's that damn Handley , the sneak '' ! ! And later in the same week they both came together to examine the register . Fortunately we were alone in the building -- so few people nowadays are interested even in their own past or in the lovely craft of other days -- for they began to abuse each other in the foulest language . Red thrusting out his tawny beard , Handley glowering under his suddenly rumpled black hair . They actually bristled . Le rouge et le noir . Violent men both . Red always was morose , yet that day the dapper Handley was the louder of the two . But for my presence , they would have been at each others' throats . During the quarrel I learned what the trouble was , from the accusations each hurled at the other . The Beech Pasture had suddenly become valuable . There's a fine granite quarry there , and granite's coming back for public buildings . Both men knew it was in the Norberg family holdings , but to which of the cousins did it belong , Anta or Freya ? ? Fortunately , I knew almost exactly what the will had said . It began with a preamble , of course . This explained that the judge of probate of Essex County , 1785 or 1786 , appointed three free-holders of Gloucester to divide and establish the Norberg estate . After the usual Honorable Sirs , it went on to say that there had been set off to the widow one full third part of the real estate of the deceased Salu Norberg , one lower room , on the Western side , privileges to the well and bake-oven and to one third of the cellar ( I can show you the cellar when we go up ) , also one Cow Right , and lastly they set off to the widow her own land that she brought with her as dower , namely the Beech Pasture . And I remember that the whole of the privileges , not counting the Beech Pasture , was valued at twenty pounds . I wish you could have seen the crests fall on these two sparring coxcombs when I told them that obviously the pasture belonged to their wives jointly . That battle scene , ridiculous as it was , remained in my mind . A disturbing picture of bad blood , to be further heightened with illicit if buccolic colors , for on a subsequent day I saw Handley escorting Anta , Red's wife , up on Dogtown Common . I felt it would be inopportune to disclose my presence . Not that I intentionally go unperceived , but the boulders up there are very high and I am a small woman . One other cause of jealousy between them I must tell you . Paint ! ! Gloomy and unkempt as Red McIver was , he was much the better painter . I suppose Handley knew it . If Red had a show at Gloucester , Handley would hurry to hang his pictures in Rockport . You may say this has little pertinence , but , gentlemen , remember that all this prepared my mind , alerted my intelligence . By such touches the pattern takes shape . You would call these the motives of crime . I would call them the patterns of life , perhaps even the designs of destiny . Yet with all this knowledge I had nothing of substance to unravel our case , as you would call it , till yesterday . One month ago , on the 20th of October , was the opening of the gunning season in Massachusetts . Not much to shoot , but there are a few pheasant . Rabbits , too , if you care for them , which most of the folk around here haven't the sense to appreciate . Any more than they have the sense to eat mussels . That was the day Red was said to have gone away . Oh yes , he'd talked about doing so . In fact , he often disappeared , from time to time , -- off to paint the sea , aboard a dragger out from Gloucester . Anta , his wife , never seemed to mind . I suppose these absences gave her more clearance for her embraces with Cousin Handley . Anyhow , I wasn't surprised , early that morning , to see Handley himself crossing from Dogtown Common Road to the Back Road . No , he didn't have his gun , which he should have . It would have been a good excuse for his being there at all . I myself had been up there by seven o'clock , after mushrooms , since there'd been a week of rain which had stopped early that morning and the day was as clear as Sandwich glass . That's what the man had said . Haney peered doubtfully at his drinking companion through bleary , tear-filled eyes . He had no ready answer , as much from surprise as from the fit of coughing . Was the man drunk or crazy or both ? ? But his new-found buddy had matched him drink for drink until he lost count , and the man's eyes were still clear . The guy is off his rocker , Haney thought to himself , and looked away from those eyes . Eyes that were clear , but also bright with a strange intensity , a sort of cold fire burning behind them . Why hadn't he noticed it before ? ? No , the man was not drunk He wondered how he got tied up with this stranger . But , of course , he remembered now . It was blurred , after two hours of steady drinking , but the occasion of it came back to him . The stranger , his head seemingly sunk in thought , started to cross the street against the light just as a huge moving van roared through the intersection . Brakes howled and a horn blared furiously , but the man would have been hit if Phil hadn't called out to him a second before . His shout had been involuntary , something anybody might have done without thinking , on the spur of the moment . As a matter of fact , he wouldn't have cared at all if the guy had been hit . Actually , he regretted having opened his mouth when the truck came to a stop and the angry driver jumped down from the cab and walked back toward them . By then , the stranger was thanking Haney profusely and had one arm around his shoulders as if he were an old friend . So the driver started to curse at both of them as if they had been in a plot together to ruin his safe-driving record . Then the man he saved turned and looked squarely into the truck driver's face , without saying a word . Very suddenly , the driver stopped swearing at them , turned on his heel and went back to his truck . Haney hadn't given it much thought at the time . Now he recalled it very clearly , and wondered what the truck driver had seen in those eyes to make him back off . It must have been the sort of look that can call a bluff without saying a word . When the light went their way , they went on across the street . And when the stranger found out that Phil was on the way to one of his favorite bars , he insisted on offering to buy drinks for both of them . Phil usually went alone and kept to himself , sitting in a corner and passing the time by nursing his favorite grudges . But he decided he wouldn't mind company in return for free drinks , even though he made good money at his job . Phil was like that . Now he wondered if it was worth it , having a screwball for company . He really didn't take the offer seriously , but he began to feel uneasy . When he finally got the coughing under control , he realized that Pete ( all he gave was his first name ) was still waiting for an answer -- he didn't even seem to wink as he continued to stare . Haney managed a weak laugh . `` Guess I can't think of anyone , Pete . Thanks anyhow '' . A faint crease appeared between the man's eyebrows . `` I think you aren't taking me seriously , Phil . I meant it . And everybody has some kind of grudge . I might have got hit by that truck if it wasn't for you . I believe in returning favors . I'll do anything for somebody I like . It won't cost you a cent , Phil . Go ahead and try me '' ! ! Phil rubbed his forehead wearily . He was beginning to feel woolly . Maybe it would be better to humor the guy and then make an exit . He really didn't expect anything to come of it , and there were a few people `` All right '' , he conceded finally , `` if you must know , I don't get along with the landlord . He keeps riding me because I like to listen to the radio and sing while I'm taking a bath . He says the neighbors complain , but I don't believe it . Why don't they tell me themselves if it bothers them '' ? ? The man closed his eyes and nodded . When he looked up again , he seemed almost contented . `` Fine . Give me your address . It will take a little time . I want to study your landlord's habits and movements first . You see , I always make it look like an accident . Maybe suicide , if it looks reasonable . In that way there's no trouble for the customer '' . Haney's eyebrows flew up . `` Customer '' ? ? Pete smiled modestly . `` It's my line of work '' , he said Five minutes later , before Haney could make his break , the stranger stood up and nodded farewell . Haney watched the small but wiry man slip out the door quickly and silently , and felt relieved to see that nobody else seemed to notice his departure . Phil decided to stay a little longer , and as time passed it seemed as if the strange little man had never been there , but for the other glass on the table . Some time before midnight he returned to his apartment and hit the sack , putting the whole incident out of mind before he fell asleep . The next day , Sunday , the hangover reminded Haney where he had been the night before . The hangover in turn reminded him of his conversation with the weirdy , and he groaned . He went for more aspirin later in the day , and passed the surly landlord on the way -- he was still alive and scowling as usual , as if tenants were a burden in his life . Phil shrugged and ignored him . He went back to work Monday . By Wednesday the landlord was still alive . Of course On Thursday , Haney mailed the monthly check for separate maintenance to his wife Lolly , and wished the stranger could do something about her Coming home from work , he was startled to see a police car parked in front of the apartment building . Inside the lobby , people were standing around , talking excitedly . His spine crawled with a foreboding premonition as he asked one of his fellow tenants what had happened . The landlord had died . Late that afternoon , it seemed , he had fallen off the roof while on some obscure errand or inspection . He had apparently been alone . Nobody witnessed the fall -- just the sickening impact when his body smashed on the pavement just outside the basement delivery entrance . Haney hoped that nobody noticed his sudden pallor , as he felt the blood drain from his cheeks . He muttered something about how terrible it was , and walked with deliberate slowness to the elevator . Once inside his apartment , he poured a drink with trembling hands and flopped limply in a chair . After a while he began to feel better about it , especially when no one bothered to ask any questions . But after all , why should they ? ? Still later , he finally convinced himself that it was an accident -- just a coincidence . The stranger really had nothing to do with it , of course Haney went to bed , happy that at least he was rid of that lousy landlord . After all , the man had no family , so no one suffered , and everybody was better off for it . Really , he said to himself , nobody kills a man just as a favor ! ! So you thought I didn't mean what I said . The stranger's eyes were large and sad , as if Phil Haney had hurt his feelings . It was like a recurrent , annoying dream , but now the dream was beginning to take on overtones of a nightmare . However , Haney knew it was not a dream . He might be very tight , but he knew where he was . It was the same bar , and it was two weeks later -- Saturday night , when he had an excuse to drink heavier than usual . He had been sitting in the usual corner at the little table , as far as possible from any talkative , friendly lushes . He was enjoying the weekly ritual of washing down his pet grievance with bourbon slightly moistened with water . This favorite grievance was not the landlord . He had already quite forgotten about him . In fact , he had only mentioned him on the spur of the moment . His real grievance was Lolly . Toward the end of his fourth hairy highball , while he was moodily making wet rings on the table-top with the bottom of the glass , he became aware that he was not alone . He looked up with bloodshot eyes and beheld the stranger sitting across the table , smiling a secret smile at him , as if they were fellow conspirators . He hadn't even noticed -- what was his name ? ? Pete ? ? -- he hadn't seen him sit down . The man was uncanny , like a shadow , and made as much noise as a shadow . Haney felt like shrinking out of sight , but he was already trapped in the corner with the wiry , dark little man . He began to wish that he hadn't shouted that other evening when the truck bore down through the crossing . Was he going to be saddled from now on with a creep for a bar-buddy ? ? He'd have to start going to some of the other places again . In a low voice , almost whispering , the man had asked Phil if he was happy with the way the landlord had been taken off his back . He made the mistake of answering in an offhand way , and instantly realized that his skepticism must have showed in his face or voice . Pete frowned slightly , then became sad and moody . Haney didn't want to encourage his company , but felt he ought to buy him a drink anyhow , to prevent possible trouble . But there was no trouble . The guy sulked over his drink , obviously upset by Haney's lack of appreciation . To break the uncomfortable silence , Haney began to talk . In time , and two drinks later , he was complaining bitterly about his wife , He was on the subject for ten minutes or so when he noticed the renewed interest in his listener -- it showed in the alert face and the suddenly bright eyes . When he paused to moisten his throat , the stranger broke in . `` But why pay her bills ? ? If she runs around with other men , and if you hate her as you say , why not just divorce her '' ? ? Haney scowled . `` That bitch would love a divorce '' , he growled . `` Then she'd get half of everything I have . Community property deal -- you know . I'd have to sell out my business to pay her off with her share . She can drop dead '' ! ! Pete nodded understandingly . `` Oh yes . Now I see . You must understand , I haven't been in this state too long . I came out here to retire . That's why I -- why I do a free job now and then . You should have told me about her before '' . Haney felt a twinge of annoyance when he heard the now familiar line again . Then a wild thought ran circles through his clouded brain . Suppose -- just suppose this guy was really what he said he was ! ! A retired professional killer If he was just a nut , no harm was done . But if he was the real thing , he could do something about Lolly . He felt very cunning , very proud of himself as he played on the other man's soft spot . `` No offense intended '' , he said gently . `` But it's just that -- well , you know . The cops didn't suspect a thing , and I thought it was a coincidence . After all , I didn't know you , Pete . It could have been an accident '' . He shrugged casually . `` But if you say you managed it '' The stranger was hooked . His eyes burned feverishly . `` Yes , yes '' , he muttered impatiently . `` Of course it looked like an accident . I always work it that way -- and always at a time when the customer has an alibi . Let me prove it , Phil . I think I can manage one more favor for you '' . He waited eagerly . Haney swished the liquor in the bottom of his glass . About halfway back Pops groped against a wall and stopped , pulled away two loosely nailed wide boards at one end , and went through . `` C'mon '' , he whispered ; ; `` floor level's about three feet down , so don't fall '' . I went through and down , into pitch darkness . He said , `` Jist stay still . I'll pull the boards back and then get us a light . Jist stay where you are '' . I jist stayed where I was while he fumbled around and then walked away . A moment later he struck a match and lighted a candle , and I could see . It was a big room , empty except for a few things of Pops's at the far end -- a wooden crate on which stood the candle , a spread out blanket , and an unrolled bindle . I looked back over my shoulder while I went to join him ; ; he'd hung another half of a blanket over the boarded window so no light would show through . I took the pint bottle from my pocket and handed it over as I sat down beside him on the spread blanket . `` You first '' , I said . He drank and handed it back . `` Nice place '' , I told him . `` Listen , I got a buddy I travel with , real nice guy named Larry . I know where he is , right near here . Could he join the party and sleep here tonight too ? ? We'll both be blowing town tomorrow so we won't be moving in on you '' . He hesitated a second , looking at the bottle , before he said `` Sure-sure '' , and I reassured him . `` He'll bring a bottle too , and I'll get another one or maybe two while I'm out . You can work on this one while I'm gone , kill it if you want '' . I took a short swallow from it myself and handed it to him . His `` sure-sure '' was enthusiastic this time . He put the bottle down . `` Git over by the window while there's light , an' I'll put th' candle out . When yuh come back I'll put it out agin till you're both inside '' . Charlie was waiting , leaning against a building front . `` Perfect set-up '' , I told him . `` But we got to go back to Fifth and get another bottle or two . On the way I'll give you the scoop '' . On the way I gave him the scoop . I bought another pint of sherry and when we got back Pops let us in in the dark , put back the blanket and then lighted the candle again . I introduced my friend Larry to Pops and we made ourselves comfortable . There was still a little , not much , left in the first bottle and we passed it around once and killed it , and Charlie opened his . I was reminded , amusedly , by a poem of Kenneth Patchen's called The Murder of Two Men by a Young Kid Wearing Lemon Colored Gloves , which Patchen himself read on a record against jazz background . The poem consisted of only two words , the word `` Wait '' , repeated over and over at irregular intervals and with different inflections , and then the word `` Now '' ! ! And a blaring final chord from the jazz group . This was the same , except that it was the murder of one man by two men and neither of us was wearing gloves . But we could wait all right ; ; there was no hurry . I said , `` Wait wait '' to Charlie and he grinned , digging the reference . We'd heard the record together once . The second bottle passed a few times . Pops was taking long ones , but not showing the effect yet . He seemed as drunk as when I'd first talked to him , but no drunker . He had a capacity ; ; if we'd really been trying to get him dead drunk we'd have had to go out for more wine . About halfway through the second bottle , Charlie looked at me across Pops , who was sitting between us and asked `` Now '' ? ? I said , `` Wait '' , and handed the bottle to Pops for his final drink . When he handed it back and I had hold of it safely , Pops was looking toward me and I said `` Now '' , to Charlie and he swung the short length of lead pipe he'd meanwhile taken from his pocket , once . It was a lead pipe cinch . There was a sound like the one you produce by flicking a watermelon with your finger , only louder , and Pops fell forward from the waist and then over sidewise . Out cold , if not dead ; ; and he'd never known what hit him -- he'd never known that anything had hit him . I reached my hand toward him to put it inside his shirt to feel for a heartbeat , but Charlie said `` Wait '' ! ! -- and said it sharply , not as in the Patchen bit , but as an order -- so I stopped my hand and looked at him . He was holding the piece of lead pipe out to me . `` We don't want to know whether he's dead , yet . I gauged that blow to be borderline . To kayo him and maybe or maybe not kill . You hit again about twice that hard before we know whether he's dead or not . That way we'll never know which of us really killed him and which was just the accomplice . Dig '' ? ? I dug him , I saw his point ; ; it made sense . I took the piece of pipe from Charlie's hand and used it , harder than he had . The thunk was louder , anyway , and I thought I heard bone crack . Charlie said , `` Good boy . That did it , if mine didn't . And we'll never know which . All right , now I'll give you a hand '' . We straightened Pops up and I made sure there was no trace of a heartbeat . I nodded to Charlie . `` Let's put him down again the way he was . It's a more natural position '' . We did that . `` How do you feel '' ? ? Charlie asked me . `` Cool '' , I told him . `` What do you feel '' ? ? `` Nothing . Well maybe I'm exaggerating . It was a kick , but not a big enough one for me to want to take the chance again , except for stakes . But let's not talk about it abstractly until we're out of here . Now , first question : the bottles . Shall we take them all with us , or leave one '' ? ? `` Take them '' , I said . `` If we left one we'd have to wipe it for fingerprints . Here's the picture we want to leave for the fuzz -- whenever the body gets found . This happened in the middle of a drinking bout with another bum . If they'd been working on a bottle or a jug he'd have taken it with him '' . `` Right . And he'd have taken the weapon with him too , so we take that . Now '' -- He looked around . `` I've been careful about fingerprints . How about you '' ? ? `` Same . There are the boards over the window , of course , but they're not painted and too rough to take prints . Same goes for the rough cement of the ledge . Besides , I doubt if the cops will even try dusting . They find dead winos every day , maybe they won't even autopsy him for the cause of death '' . `` We can't take a chance on that . We've got to assume they'll decide he was murdered and we've got to keep the picture consistent . Our hypothetical other bum who killed him would have turned out his pockets . Let's do that '' . We did that and found a dirty handkerchief , some matches and fourteen cents in change . We took the matches -- they were book matches and once they'd been touched might retain fingerprints -- and the change . We discussed the candle and decided the hypothetical other bum would have left it burning to light his way to the window and because he'd have no reason to blow it out . The candle had been stuck on a tin lid so it wouldn't set fire to the crate when it guttered out . A fire wouldn't have mattered except that it would cause Pops to be found sooner . He might not be found for days , even weeks , otherwise . We went once more over every point , then triple-checked . Being picked up for questioning by a cop on the way out seemed to be the only possible remaining danger , and we weren't picked up by a cop . In fact , nobody saw us , cop or citizen . Winsett is a quiet street with no taverns and was completely deserted at that hour . Which , if it matters , was one A.M. . Less than three hours ago we'd decided , in Maxine Wells's pad on Cosmo , to commit a trial murder . It had gone like clockwork . Almost too smoothly , I found myself thinking , and then told myself that was ridiculous . How safe is too safe ? ? Thinking like that can get you into a padded pad . An hour later we were back in my unpadded pad , killing what had been left of the second pint . We decided to leave the third one intact for tomorrow . Also our plans for me to commit Charlie's murder and for him to commit mine . But we were really going to do it . We shook hands on it . We planned ahead only one step , a rendezvous for tomorrow when we could swap notes . I'd tell him everything I'd learned about Seaton's habits and habitat , and he'd tell me the score on Radic . We made the date for two o'clock in the afternoon at Maxine Wells's pad . Charlie would get there early because he had the key . From here on in , the less Charlie and I were seen together in public , or visited one another's rooms , the better . I was dead tired and slept soundly , as far as I know dreamlessly . We met at Maxine's and decided we were set to stay as long as it took , into or even through the evening , to talk things out . Charlie had brought food and we'd decided on no drinks . I'd brought along the virgin pint from last night , but we were going to kill that only when we were through talking . I talked first , telling him everything I knew about Seaton and his house and domestic arrangements . I drew diagrams and floor plans ; ; he memorized them thoroughly and then we tore them into tiny pieces and flushed them down . He gave me equivalent and even more detailed dope on Radic , including diagrams -- one of the apartment building Radic lived in and one of the apartment itself . He'd been there several times , back when , while he and Radic had been friends , or at least not enemies . It didn't take us as long as we'd thought it might ; ; it was not quite six o'clock when we finished and Charlie said , `` Well , I guess that's it . Shall we flip a coin to see which of us goes first ? ? Or would you rather deal a hand of show-down poker or play a game of gin rummy , or what '' ? ? `` Wait a minute , Charlie '' , I said . `` One thing we haven't discussed , expense money . We'll need some at least , if only bus fare to the scene of the crime . And if you're as flat broke as I am , I think we'll have to take the added risk of knocking over a filling station or something before we split for one of us to set up an alibi while the other does his dirty work '' . He sighed . `` All right , I'll come clean . I've got a little stashed for a rainy day , and I guess this is rainy enough . A couple of hundred . If you draw the short straw I'll lend you some bread , like fifty bucks , before I take off to visit my sister in Frisco . Then , after I'm back , another fifty so you can put some mileage on yourself and have a solid alibi somewhere while I take care of your seat cover boy '' . `` Solid '' , I said . I took a deep breath , and the plunge . `` In that case , let's not draw . I'll go to bat first . You'd have to wait till Seaton's back from Mexico City and also while I set it up with Doris to have her have an alibi for D-night . So it wouldn't be for days or even a week before you could do anything . But your friend Manny can go any time '' . He grinned and clapped me on the shoulder . `` I was hoping you'd say that , Willy . But I wouldn't have suggested it . Well -- in that case , I take off tomorrow morning for Frisco . And , in case , I brought the money with me '' . Now that he knew himself to be self he was free to grok ever closer to his brothers , merge without let . Self's integrity was and is and ever had been . Mike stopped to cherish all his brother selves , the many threes-fulfilled on Mars , corporate and discorporate , the precious few on Earth -- the unknown powers of three on Earth that would be his to merge with and cherish now that at last long waiting he grokked and cherished himself . Mike remained in trance ; ; there was much to grok , loose ends to puzzle over and fit into his growing -- all that he had seen and heard and been at the Archangel Foster Tabernacle ( not just cusp when he and Digby had come face to face alone ) why Bishop Senator Boone made him warily uneasy , how Miss Dawn Ardent tasted like a water brother when she was not , the smell of goodness he had incompletely grokked in the jumping up and down and wailing -- Jubal's conversations coming and going -- Jubal's words troubled him most ; ; he studied them , compared them with what he had been taught as a nestling , struggling to bridge between languages , the one he thought with and the one he was learning to think in . The word `` church '' which turned up over and over again among Jubal's words gave him knotty difficulty ; ; there was no Martian concept to match it -- unless one took `` church '' and `` worship '' and `` God '' and `` congregation '' and many other words and equated them to the totality of the only world he had known during growing-waiting then forced the concept back into English in that phrase which had been rejected ( by each differently ) by Jubal , by Mahmoud , by Digby . `` Thou art God '' . He was closer to understanding it in English now , although it could never have the inevitability of the Martian concept it stood for . In his mind he spoke simultaneously the English sentence and the Martian word and felt closer grokking . Repeating it like a student telling himself that the jewel is in the lotus he sank into nirvana . Before midnight he speeded his heart , resumed normal breathing , ran down his check list , uncurled and sat up . He had been weary ; ; now he felt light and gay and clear-headed , ready for the many actions he saw spreading out before him . He felt a puppyish need for company as strong as his earlier necessity for quiet . He stepped out into the hall , was delighted to encounter a water brother . `` Hi '' ! ! `` Oh . Hello , Mike . My , you look chipper '' . `` I feel fine ! ! Where is everybody '' ? ? `` Asleep . Ben and Stinky went home an hour ago and people started going to bed '' . `` Oh '' . Mike felt disappointed that Mahmoud had left ; ; he wanted to explain his new grokking . `` I ought to be asleep , too , but I felt like a snack . Are you hungry '' ? ? `` Sure , I'm hungry '' ! ! `` Come on , there's some cold chicken and we'll see what else '' . They went downstairs , loaded a tray lavishly . `` Let's take it outside . It's plenty warm '' . `` A fine idea '' , Mike agreed . `` Warm enough to swim -- real Indian summer . I'll switch on the floods '' . `` Don't bother '' , Mike answered . `` I'll carry the tray '' . He could see in almost total darkness . Jubal said that his night-sight probably came from the conditions in which he had grown up , and Mike grokked this was true but grokked that there was more to it ; ; his foster parents had taught him to see . As for the night being warm , he would have been comfortable naked on Mount Everest but his water brothers had little tolerance for changes in temperature and pressure ; ; he was considerate of their weakness , once he learned of it . But he was looking forward to snow -- seeing for himself that each tiny crystal of the water of life was a unique individual , as he had read -- walking barefoot , rolling in it . In the meantime he was pleased with the warm night and the still more pleasing company of his water brother . `` Okay , take the tray . I'll switch on the underwater lights . That'll be plenty to eat by '' . `` Fine '' . Mike liked having light up through the ripples ; ; it was a goodness , beauty . They picnicked by the pool , then lay back on the grass and looked at stars . `` Mike , there's Mars . It is Mars , isn't it ? ? Or Antares '' ? ? `` It is Mars '' . `` Mike ? ? What are they doing on Mars '' ? ? He hesitated ; ; the question was too wide for the sparse English language . `` On the side toward the horizon -- the southern hemisphere -- it is spring ; ; plants are being taught to grow '' . `` ' Taught to grow ' '' ? ? He hesitated . `` Larry teaches plants to grow . I have helped him . But my people -- Martians , I mean ; ; I now grok you are my people -- teach plants another way . In the other hemisphere it is growing colder and nymphs , those who stayed alive through the summer , are being brought into nests for quickening and more growing '' . He thought . `` Of the humans we left at the equator , one has discorporated and the others are sad '' . Yes , I heard it in the news '' . Mike had not heard it ; ; he had not known it until asked . `` They should not be sad . Mr. Booker T. W. Jones Food Technician First Class is not sad ; ; the Old Ones have cherished him '' . `` You knew him '' ? ? `` Yes . He had his own face , dark and beautiful . But he was homesick '' . `` Oh , dear ! ! Mike do you ever get homesick ? ? For Mars '' ? ? `` At first I was homesick '' , he answered . `` I was lonely always '' . He rolled toward her and took her in his arms . `` But now I am not lonely . I grok I shall never be lonely again '' . `` Mike darling '' -- They kissed , and went on kissing . Presently his water brother said breathlessly . `` Oh , my ! ! That was almost worse than the first time '' . `` You are all right , my brother '' ? ? `` Yes . Yes indeed . Kiss me again '' . A long time later , by cosmic clock , she said , `` Mike ? ? Is that -- I mean , ' Do you know ' '' -- `` I know . It is for growing closer . Now we grow closer '' . `` Well I've been ready a long time -- goodness , we all have , but never mind , dear ; ; turn just a little . I'll help '' . As they merged , grokking together , Mike said softly and triumphantly : `` Thou art God '' . Her answer was not in words . Then , as their grokking made them ever closer and Mike felt himself almost ready to discorporate her voice called him back : `` Oh ! ! Oh ! ! Thou art God '' ! ! `` We grok God '' . 25 . On Mars humans were building pressure domes for the male and female party that would arrive by next ship . This went faster than scheduled as the Martians were helpful . Part of the time saved was spent on a preliminary estimate for a long-distance plan to free bound oxygen in the sands of Mars to make the planet more friendly to future human generations . The Old Ones neither helped nor hindered this plan ; ; time was not yet . Their meditations were approaching a violent cusp that would shape Martian art for many millennia . On Earth elections continued and a very advanced poet published a limited edition of verse consisting entirely of punctuation marks and spaces ; ; Time magazine reviewed it and suggested that the Federation Assembly Daily Record should be translated into the medium . A colossal campaign opened to sell more sexual organs of plants and Mrs. Joseph ( `` Shadow of Greatness '' ) Douglas was quoted as saying : `` I would no more sit down without flowers on my table than without serviettes '' . A Tibetan swami from Palermo , Sicily , announced in Beverly Hills a newly discovered , ancient yoga discipline for ripple breathing which increased both pranha and cosmic attraction between sexes . His chelas were required to assume the matsyendra posture dressed in hand-woven diapers while he read aloud from Rig-Veda and an assistant guru examined their purses in another room -- nothing was stolen ; ; the purpose was less immediate . The President of the United States proclaimed the first Sunday in November as `` National Grandmothers' Day '' and urged America to say it with flowers . A funeral parlor chain was indicted for price-cutting . Fosterite bishops , after secret conclave , announced the Church's second Major Miracle : Supreme Bishop Digby had been translated bodily to Heaven and spot-promoted to Archangel , ranking with-but-after Archangel Foster . The glorious news had been held up pending Heavenly confirmation of the elevation of a new Supreme Bishop , Huey Short -- a candidate accepted by the Boone faction after lots had been cast repeatedly . L'Unita and Hoy published identical denunciations of Short's elevation , l'Osservatore Romano and the Christian Science Monitor ignored it , Times of India snickered at it , and the Manchester Guardian simply reported it -- the Fosterites in England were few but extremely militant . Digby was not pleased with his promotion . The Man from Mars had interrupted him with his work half finished -- and that stupid jackass Short was certain to louse it up . Foster listened with angelic patience until Digby ran down , then said , `` Listen , junior , you're an angel now -- so forget it . Eternity is no time for recriminations . You too were a stupid jackass until you poisoned me . Afterwards you did well enough . Now that Short is Supreme Bishop he'll do all right , he can't help it . Same as with the Popes . Some of them were warts until they got promoted . Check with one of them , go ahead -- there's no professional jealousy here '' . Digby calmed down , but made one request . Foster shook his halo . `` You can't touch him . You shouldn't have tried to . Oh , you can submit a requisition for a miracle if you want to make a fool of yourself . But , I'm telling you , it'll be turned down -- you don't understand the System yet . The Martians have their own setup , different from ours , and as long as they need him , we can't touch him . They run their show their way -- the Universe has variety , something for everybody -- a fact you field workers often miss '' . `` You mean this punk can brush me aside and I've got to hold still for it '' ? ? `` I held still for the same thing , didn't I ? ? I'm helping you now , am I not ? ? Now look , there's work to be done and lots of it . The Boss wants performance , not gripes . If you need a Day off to calm down , duck over to the Muslim Paradise and take it . Otherwise , straighten your halo , square your wings , and dig in . The sooner you act like an angel the quicker you'll feel angelic . Get Happy , junior '' ! ! Digby heaved a deep ethereal sigh . `` Okay , I'm Happy . Where do I start '' ? ? Jubal did not hear of Digby's disappearance when it was announced , and , when he did , while he had a fleeting suspicion , he dismissed it ; ; if Mike had had a finger in it , he had gotten away with it -- and what happened to supreme bishops worried Jubal not at all as long as he wasn't bothered . His household had gone through an upset . Jubal deduced what had happened but did not know with whom -- and didn't want to inquire . Mike was of legal age and presumed able to defend himself in the clinches . Anyhow , it was high time the boy was salted . Jubal couldn't reconstruct the crime from the way the girls behaved because patterns kept shifting -- ABC vs D , then BCD vs A or AB vs CD , or AD vs CB , through all ways that four women can gang up on each other . This continued most of the week following that ill-starred trip to church , during which period Mike stayed in his room and usually in a trance so deep that Jubal would have pronounced him dead had he not seen it before . Jubal would not have minded it if service had not gone to pieces . The girls seemed to spend half their time tiptoeing in `` to see if Mike was all right '' and they were too preoccupied to cook , much less be secretaries . Even rock-steady Anne -- Hell , Anne was the worst ! ! Absent-minded , subject to unexplained tears Jubal would have bet his life that if Anne were to witness the Second Coming , she would memorize date , time , personae , events , and barometric pressure without batting her calm blue eyes . The expense and time involved are astronomical . However , we sent a third vessel out , a much smaller and faster one than the first two . We have learned much about interstellar drives since a hundred years ago ; ; that is all I can tell you about them . `` But the third ship came back several years ago and reported '' `` That it had found a planet on which human beings could live and which was already inhabited by sentient beings '' ! ! Said Hal , forgetting in his enthusiasm that he had not been asked to speak . Macneff stopped pacing to stare at Hal with his pale blue eyes . `` How did you know '' ? ? He said sharply . `` Forgive me , Sandalphon '' , said Hal . `` But it was inevitable ! ! Did not the Forerunner predict in his Time and the World Line that such a planet would be found ? ? I believe it was on page 573 '' ! ! Macneff smiled and said , `` I am glad that your scriptural lessons have left such an impression '' . How could they not ? ? Thought Hal . Besides , they were not the only impressions . I still bear scars on my back where Pornsen , my gapt , whipped me because I had not learned my lessons well enough . He was a good impresser , that Pornsen . Was ? ? Is ! ! As I grew older and was promoted , so was he , always where I was . He was my gapt in the creche . He was the dormitory gapt when I went to college and thought I was getting away from him . He is now my block gapt . He is the one responsible for my getting such low M. R.'s . Swiftly , came the revulsion , the protest . No , not he , for I , and I alone , am responsible for whatever happens to me . If I get a low M. R. , I do so because I want it that way or my dark self does . If I die , I die because I willed it so . So , forgive me , Sigmen , for the contrary-to-reality thoughts ! ! `` Please pardon me again , Sandalphon '' , said Hal . `` But did the expedition find any records of the Forerunner having been on this planet ? ? Perhaps , even , though this is too much to wish , find the Forerunner himself '' ? ? `` No '' , said Macneff . `` Though that does not mean that there may not be such records there . The expedition was under orders to make a swift survey of conditions and then to return to Earth . I can't tell you now the distance in lightyears or what star this was , though you can see it with the naked eye at night in this hemisphere . If you volunteer , you will be told where you're going after the ship leaves . And it leaves very soon '' . `` You need a linguist '' ? ? Said Hal . `` The ship is huge '' , said Macneff , `` but the number of military men and specialists we are taking limits the linguists to one . We have considered several of your professionals because they were lamechians and above suspicion . Unfortunately '' Hal waited : Macneff paced some more , frowning . Then , he said , `` Unfortunately , only one lamechian linguist exists , and he is too old for this expedition . Therefore '' `` A thousand pardons '' , said Hal . `` But I have just thought of one thing . I am married '' . `` No problem at all '' , said Macneff . `` There will be no women aboard the Gabriel . And , if a man is married , he will automatically be given a divorce '' . Hal gasped , and he said , `` A divorce '' ? ? Macneff raised his hands apologetically and said , `` You are horrified , of course . But , from our reading of the Western Talmud , we Urielites believe that the Forerunner , knowing this situation would arise , made reference to and provision for divorce . It's inevitable in this case , for the couple will be separated for , at the least , forty years . Naturally , he couched the provision in obscure language . In his great and glorious wisdom , he knew that our enemies the Israelites must not be able to read therein what we planned '' . `` I volunteer '' , said Hal . `` Tell me more , Sandalphon '' . Six months later , Hal Yarrow stood in the observation dome of the Gabriel and watched the ball of Earth dwindle above him . It was night on this hemisphere , but the light blazed from the megalopolises of Australia , Japan , China , Southeast Asia , India , Siberia . Hal , the linguist , saw the glittering discs and necklaces in terms of the languages spoken therein . Australia , the Philippine Islands , Japan , and northern China were inhabited by those members of the Haijac Union that spoke American . Southern China , all of southeast Asia , southern India and Ceylon , these states of the Malay Federation spoke Bazaar . Siberia spoke Icelandic . His mind turned the globe swiftly for him , and he visualized Africa , which used Swahili south of the Sahara Sea . All around the Mediterranean Sea , Asia Minor , northern India , and Tibet , Hebrew was the native tongue . In southern Europe , between the Israeli Republics and the Icelandic-speaking peoples of northern Europe , was a thin but long stretch of territory called March . This was no man's land , disputed by the Haijac Union and the Israeli Republic , a potential source of war for the last two hundred years . Neither nation would give up their claim on it , yet neither wished to make any move that might lead to a second Apocalyptic War . So , for all practical purposes , it was an independent nation and by now had its own organized government ( unrecognized outside its own borders ) . Its citizens spoke all of the world's surviving tongues , plus a new one called Lingo , a pidgin whose vocabulary was derived from the other six and whose syntax was so simple it could be contained on half a sheet of paper . Hal saw in his mind the rest of Earth : Iceland , Greenland , the Caribbean Islands , and the eastern half of South America . Here the peoples spoke the tongue of Iceland because that island had gotten the jump on the Hawaiian-Americans who were busy resettling North America and the western half of South America after the Apocalyptic War . Then there was North America , where American was the native speech of all except the twenty descendants of French-Canadians living on the Hudson Bay Preserve . Hal knew that when that side of Earth rotated into the night zone , Sigmen City would blaze out into space . And , somewhere in that enormous light , was his apartment . But Mary would soon no longer be living there , for she would be notified in a few days that her husband had died in an accident while on a flight to Tahiti . She would weep in private , he was sure , for she loved him in her frigid way , though in public she would be dry-eyed . Her friends and professional associates would sympathize with her , not because she had lost a beloved husband , but because she had been married to a man who thought unrealistically . If Hal Yarrow had been killed in a crash , he must have wanted it that way . There was no such thing as an `` accident '' . Somehow , all the other passengers ( also supposed to have died in this web of elaborate frauds to cover up the disappearance of the personnel of the Gabriel ) had simultaneously `` agreed '' to die . And , therefore , being in disgrace , they would not be cremated and their ashes flung to the winds in public ceremony . No , the fish could eat their bodies for all the Sturch cared . Hal felt sorry for Mary ; ; he had a time keeping the tears from welling to his own eyes as he stood in the crowd in the observation dome . Yet , he told himself , this was the best way . He and Mary would no longer have to tear and rend at each other ; ; their mutual torture would be over . Mary was free to marry again , not knowing that the Sturch had secretly given her a divorce , thinking that death had dissolved her marriage . She would have a year in which to make up her mind , to choose a mate from a list selected by her gapt . Perhaps , the psychological barriers that had prevented her from conceiving Hal's child would no longer be present . Perhaps . Hal doubted if this happy event would occur . Mary was as frozen below the navel as he . No matter who the candidate for marriage selected by the gapt The gapt . Pornsen . He would no longer have to see that fat face , hear that whining voice `` Hal Yarrow '' ! ! Said the whining voice . And , slowly , feeling himself icy yet burning , Hal turned . There was the squat loose-jowled man , smiling lopsidedly up at him . `` My beloved ward , my perennial gadfly '' , said the whining voice . `` I had no idea that you , too , would be on this glorious voyage . But I might have known ! ! We seem to be bound by love ; ; Sigmen himself must have foreseen it . Love to you , my ward '' . `` Sigmen love you , too , my guardian '' , said Hal , choking . `` How wonderful to see your cherished self . I had thought we would never again speak to each other '' . 5 the Gabriel pointed towards her destination and , under one-gee acceleration , began to build up towards her ultimate velocity , 99.1 percent of the speed of light . Meanwhile , all the personnel except those few needed to carry out the performance of the ship , went into the suspensor . Here they would lie in suspended animation for many years . Some time later , after a check had been made of all automatic equipment , the crew would join the others . They would sleep while the Gabriel's drive would increase the acceleration to a point which the unfrozen bodies of the personnel could not have endured . Upon reaching the desired speed , the automatic equipment would cut off the drive , and the silent but not empty vessel would hurl towards the star which was its journey's end . Many years later , the photon-counting apparatus in the nose of the ship would determine that the star was close enough to actuate deceleration . Again , a force too strong for unfrozen bodies to endure would be applied . Then , after slowing the vessel considerably , the drive would adjust to a one-gee deceleration . And the crew would be automatically brought out of their suspended animation . These members would then unthaw the rest of the personnel . And , in the half-year left before reaching their destination , the men would carry out whatever preparations were needed . Hal Yarrow was among the last to go into the suspensor and among the first to come out . He had to study the recordings of the language of the chief nation of Ozagen , Siddo . And , from the first , he faced a difficult task . The expedition that had discovered Ozagen had succeeded in correlating two thousand Siddo words with an equal number of American words . The description of the Siddo syntax was very restricted . And , as Hal found out , obviously mistaken in many cases . This discovery caused Hal anxiety . His duty was to write a school text and to teach the entire personnel of the Gabriel how to speak Ozagen . Yet , if he used all of the little means at his disposal , he would be instructing his students wrongly . Moreover , even getting this across would be difficult . For one thing , the organs of speech of the Ozagen natives differed somewhat from Earthmen's ; ; the sounds made by these organs were , therefore , dissimilar . It was true that they could be approximated , but would the Ozagenians understand these approximations ? ? Another obstacle was the grammatical construction of Siddo . Consider the tense system . Instead of inflecting a verb or using an unattached particle to indicate the past or future , Siddo used an entirely different word . Thus , the masculine animate infinitive dabhumaksanigalu'ahai , meaning to live , was , in the perfect tense , ksu'u'peli'afo , and , in the future , mai'teipa . The same use of an entirely different word applied for all the other tenses . Plus the fact that Siddo not only had the normal ( to Earthmen ) three genders of masculine , feminine , and neuter , but the two extra of inanimate and spiritual . Fortunately , gender was inflected , though the expression of it would be difficult for anybody not born in Siddo . The system of indicating gender varied according to tense . All the other parts of speech : nouns , pronouns , adjectives , adverbs , and conjunctions operated under the same system as the verbs . This was not , for the Angel , just a matter of running through a logical or deductive chain , or deciding on some action from some already established premise . No doubt the Angels could do that kind of thing as fast as any computer . What Gabriel was being asked to do now , however , was to re-examine all his basic assumptions , make value-judgments on them , and give them new and different powers in his mind to govern his motives . This is not wholly a reasoning process -- a computer cannot do it all -- and even in an Angel it takes time . ( Or , perhaps , especially in an Angel , whose assumptions had mostly been fixed millions of years ago . ) Being reasonably sure of the reason for the long pause , however , did not make it seem any less long to Jack . He had already become used to Hesperus' snapping back answers to questions almost before Jack could get them asked . There was nothing he could do but wait . The dice were cast . At last Gabriel spoke . `` We misjudged you '' , he said slowly . `` We had concluded that no race as ephemeral as yours could have had time to develop a sense of justice . Of course we have before us the example of the great races at the galactic center ; ; individually they are nearly as mortal as you -- the difference does not seem very marked to us , where it exists . But they have survived for long periods as races , whereas you are young . We shall recommend to them that they shorten your trial period by half . `` For now , it is clear that we were in the wrong . You may reclaim your property , and the penalty on Hesperus is lifted . Hesperus , you may speak '' . `` I did not perceive this essential distinction either , First-Born '' , Hesperus said at once , `` I was only practicing a concept that Jack taught me , called a deal '' . `` Nevertheless , you were its agent . Jack , what is the nature of this concept '' ? ? `` It's a kind of agreement in which each party gives something to the other '' , Jack said . `` We regard it as fair only when each party feels that what he has received is as valuable , or more valuable , than what he has given '' . His heart , he discovered , was pounding . `` For instance , Hesperus agreed to help me find my property , and I agreed to take him to Earth . Between individuals , this process is called bargaining . When it is done between races or nations , it is called making a treaty . And the major part of my mission to your nest is to make a treaty between your race and mine . Recovering the property was much less important '' . `` Strange '' , Gabriel said . `` And apparently impossible . Though it might be that we would have much to give you , you have nothing to give us '' . `` Hesperus and Lucifer '' , Jack said , `` show that we do '' . Another pause ; ; but this one was not nearly as long . `` Then it is a matter of pleasure ; ; of curiosity ; ; of a more alive time . Yes , those could be commodities under this concept . But you should understand , Jack , that Hesperus and Lucifer are not long out of the nursery . Visiting the Earth would not be an offering of worth to those of us who are older '' . This explained a great deal . `` All the more reason , then '' , Jack said , `` why we must have a treaty . We will gladly entertain your young and give them proper living quarters , in return for their help in running our fusion reactors . But we must know if this is in accordance with your customs , and must have your agreement they will not misuse the power we put in their hands , to our hurt '' . `` But this simply requires that they behave in accordance with the dictates of their own natures , and respect yours in turn . To this we of course agree '' . Jack felt a wave of complete elation , but in a second it had vanished without a trace . What Gabriel was asking was that mankind forego all its parochial moral judgments , and contract to let the Angels serve on Earth as it is in Heaven regardless of the applicable Earth laws . The Angels in turn would exercise similar restraints in respect for the natural preferences and natures of the Earthmen -- but they had no faintest notion of man's perverse habit of passing and enforcing laws which were contrary to his own preferences and violations of his nature . The simple treaty principle that Gabriel was asking him to ratify , in short , was nothing less than total trust . Nothing less would serve . And it might be , considering the uncomfortable custom the Angels had of thinking of everything in terms of absolutes , that the proposal of anything less might well amount instead to something like a declaration of war . Furthermore , even the highly trained law clerk who was a part of Jack's total make-up could not understand how the principle could ever be codified . Almost the whole experience of mankind pointed toward suspicion , not trust , as the safest and sanest attitude toward all outsiders . Yet there was some precedent for it . The history of disarmament agreements , for instance , had been unreassuringly dismal ; ; but the United States and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics nevertheless did eventually agree on an atomic bomb test ban , and a sort of provisional acceptance of each other's good intentions on this limited question . Out of that agreement , though not by any easy road , eventually emerged the present world hegemony of the United Nations ; ; suspicion between member states still existed , but it was of about the same low order of virulence as the twentieth-century rivalry between Arizona and California over water supplies . Besides , agreements `` in principle '' , with the petty details to be thrashed out later , were commonplace in diplomatic history . The trouble with them was that they almost never worked , and in fact an agreement `` in principle '' historically turned out to be a sure sign that neither party really wanted the quarrel settled . Suppose that this one were to work ? ? There was no question in Jack's mind of the good faith on one side , at least . If mankind could be convinced of that It was worth trying . In fact , it had to be tried . It would be at once the most tentative and most final treaty that Earth had ever signed . Secretary Hart had taught Jack , at least partially , to be content with small beginnings in all diplomatic matters ; ; but there was no small way to handle this one . He turned back to the screens , the crucial , conclusive phrase on his lips . But he was too late . He had lost his audience . For a moment he could make no sense at all of what he saw . It seemed to be only a riot of color , light and meaningless activity . Gradually , he realized that the pentagon of Angel elders had vanished , and that the ritual learning dance of the nursery had been broken up . The Angels in the nursery were zigzagging wildly in all directions , seemingly at random . `` Hesperus ! ! What's going on here ? ? What's happened '' ? ? `` Your brothers have been found . They are on their way here '' . `` Where ? ? I don't see them . The instruments don't show them '' . `` You can't see them yet , Jack . They'll be in range in a short while '' . Jack scanned the skies , the boards , and the skies again . Nothing . No -- there was a tiny pip on the radar ; ; and it was getting bigger rapidly . If that was the skiff , it was making unprecedented speed . Then the skiff hove into sight , just a dot of light at first against the roiling blackness and crimson streaks of the Coal Sack . Through the telescope , Jack could see that both spacesuits were still attached to it . The sail was still unfurled , though there were a good many holes in it , as Langer had predicted would be the case by now . It was a startling , almost numenous sight ; ; but even more awesome was the fact that it was trailing an enormous comet's-tail of Angels . The skiff was not heading for the nursery , however . It seemed unlikely that her crew , if either of them were alive , could even see the Ariadne , for they were passing her at a distance of nearly a light-year . And there would be no chance of signaling them -- without the Nernst generator Jack could not send a call powerful enough to get through all the static , and by the time he could rebuild his fusion power the skiff would be gone . Fuming , helpless , he watched them pass him . The sail , ragged though it was , still had enough surface to catch some of the ocean of power being poured out from the nursery stars . He would never have believed , without seeing it , that the bizarre little vessel could go so fast . But where was it going ? ? And why was it causing so much agitation among the Angels , and being followed by so many of them ? ? There was only one possible answer , but Jack's horrified mind refused to believe it until he had fed the radar plots of the skiff's course into the computer . The curve on the card the computer spat back at him couldn't be argued with , however . The skiff was headed for the very center of the nebula -- toward that place which , Jack knew now , could hold nothing less important than the very core of the Angel's life and religion . It was clear that Langer had at last found a way to attract the Angel's attention . It was equally clear that as of this moment , the treaty was off . Stern chase 10 Langer would have to be headed off , whether he knew where he was going or not . Almost surely he did ; ; after all , he had had the same set of facts as Jack had had to work from , and he was an almost frighteningly observant man . But not having talked to the Angels , he had made a wrong turn in his reasoning somewhere along the line . Had he decided , perhaps , that the center of the cloud was a center of government , instead of a center of life and faith '' ? ? But it didn't matter now whether he meant to invade the Holy of Holies , or was simply headed in that direction by accident . If it was intentional , it was now also unnecessary ; ; and whether intentional or not , the outcome would be disastrous . Jack crawled under the boards and restored the six feet of lead line he had excised from the Nernst generator switch . When he was back on his feet again and about to reinstall the fuses , however , he hesitated . He had to have fusion power to catch up with the skiff , and he had to have it fast . But fusion power in the Coal Sack was what had triggered all the trouble in the first place -- and he already had an Angel aboard . `` Hesperus '' ? ? `` Receiving '' . `` I'm going to turn my generator back on , as I promised to do . But I can't take you to Earth yet . First I've got to intercept my brothers before they get any deeper into trouble . Will you obstruct this , or will you help ? ? I know it's not part of the bargain , and your elders might not like it '' . `` Nobody else can live in your hearth while I am in it '' , Hesperus said promptly . `` As for my elders , they have already admitted that they were wrong . If because of this incident they become angry with Earth , I will not be permitted to go there at all . Therefore of course I will help '' . With a short-lived sigh of relief , Jack plugged the fuses back in and threw the switch . Without an instant's transition , the green light that meant full fusion power winked on the board . Always before , it had taken five minutes to -- Of course . Hesperus was in there . From here on out , the Ariadne was going to be hotter than any space cruiser man had ever dreamed of . But since he had failed to anticipate it , he lost the five minutes anyhow , in plotting an intercept orbit . `` Hesperus , don't use this t-tau vector trick of yours , please . Ryan hefted his bulk up and supported it on one elbow . He rubbed his eyes sleepily with one huge paw . `` Ekstrohm , Nogol , you guys okay '' ? ? `` Nothing wrong with me that couldn't be cured '' , Nogol said . He didn't say what would cure him ; ; he had been explaining all during the trip what he needed to make him feel like himself . His small black eyes darted inside the olive oval of his face . `` Ekstrohm '' ? ? Ryan insisted . `` Okay '' . `` Well , let's take a ground-level look at the country around here '' . The facsiport rolled open on the landscape . A range of bluffs hugged the horizon , the color of decaying moss . Above them , the sky was the black of space , or the almost equal black of the winter sky above Minneapolis , seen against neon-lit snow . That cold , empty sky was full of fire and light . It seemed almost a magnification of the Galaxy itself , of the Milky Way , blown up by some master photographer . This fiery swath was actually only a belt of minor planets , almost like the asteroid belt in the original Solar System . These planets were much bigger , nearly all capable of holding an atmosphere . But to the infuriation of scientists , for no known reason not all of them did . This would be the fifth mapping expedition to the planetoids of Yancy-6 in three generations . They lay months away from the nearest Earth star by jump drive , and no one knew what they were good for , although it was felt that they would probably be good for something if it could only be discovered -- much like the continent of Antarctica in ancient history . `` How can a planet with so many neighbors be so lonely '' ? ? Ryan asked . He was the captain , so he could ask questions like that . `` Some can be lonely in a crowd '' , Nogol said elaborately . `` What will we need outside , Ryan '' ? ? Ekstrohm asked . `` No helmets '' , the captain answered . `` We can breathe out there , all right . It just won't be easy . This old world lost all of its helium and trace gases long ago . Nitrogen and oxygen are about it '' . `` Ryan , look over there '' , Nogol said . `` Animals . Ringing the ship . Think they're intelligent , maybe hostile '' ? ? `` I think they're dead '' , Ekstrohm interjected quietly . `` I get no readings from them at all . Sonic , electronic , galvanic -- all blank . According to these needles , they're stone dead '' . `` Ekstrohm , you and I will have a look '' , Ryan said . `` You hold down the fort , Nogol . Take it easy '' . `` Easy '' , Nogol confirmed . `` I heard a story once about a rookie who got excited when the captain stepped outside and he couldn't get an encephalographic reading on him . Me , I know the mind of an officer works in a strange and unfathomable manner '' . `` I'm not worried about you mis-reading the dials , Nogol , just about a lug like you reading them at all . Remember , when the little hand is straight up that's negative . Positive results start when it goes towards the hand you use to make your mark '' . `` But I'm ambidextrous '' . Ryan told him what he could do then . Ekstrohm smiled , and followed the captain through the airlock with only a glance at the lapel gauge on his coverall . The strong negative field his suit set up would help to repel bacteria and insects . Actually , the types of infection that could attack a warm-blooded mammal were not infinite , and over the course of the last few hundred years adequate defenses had been found for all basic categories . He wasn't likely to come down with hot chills and puzzling striped fever . They ignored the ladder down to the planet surface and , with only a glance at the seismological gauge to judge surface resistance , dropped to the ground . It was day , but in the thin atmosphere contrasts were sharp between light and shadow . They walked from midnight to noon , noon to midnight , and came to the beast sprawled on its side . Ekstrohm nudged it with a boot . `` Hey , this is pretty close to a wart-hog '' . `` Uh-huh '' , Ryan admitted . `` One of the best matches I've ever found . Well , it has to happen . Statistical average and all . Still , it sometimes gives you a creepy feeling to find a rabbit or a snapping turtle on some strange world . It makes you wonder if this exploration business isn't all some big joke , and somebody has been everywhere before you even started '' . The surveyor looked sidewise at the captain . The big man seldom gave out with such thoughts . Ekstrohm cleared his throat . `` What shall we do with this one ? ? Dissect it '' ? ? Ryan nudged it with his toe , following Ekstrohm's example . `` I don't know , Stormy . It sure as hell doesn't look like any dominant intelligent species to me . No hands , for one thing . Of course , that's not definite proof '' . `` No , it isn't '' , Ekstrohm said . `` I think we'd better let it lay until we get a clearer picture of the ecological setup around here . In the meantime , we might be thinking on the problem all these dead beasts represent . What killed them '' ? ? `` It looks like we did , when we made blastdown '' . `` But what about our landing was lethal to the creatures '' ? ? `` Radiation '' ? ? Ekstrohm suggested . `` The planet is very low in radiation from mineral deposits , and the atmosphere seems to shield out most of the solar output . Any little dose of radiation might knock off these critters '' . `` I don't know about that . Maybe it would work the other way . Maybe because they have had virtually no radioactive exposure and don't have any R's stored up , they could take a lot without harm '' . `` Then maybe it was the shockwave we set up . Or maybe it's sheer xenophobia . They curl up and die at the sight of something strange and alien -- like a spaceship '' . `` Maybe '' , the captain admitted . `` At this stage of the game anything could be possible . But there's one possibility I particularly don't like '' . `` And that is '' ? ? `` Suppose it was not us that killed these aliens . Suppose it is something right on the planet , native to it . I just hope it doesn't work on Earthmen too . These critters went real sudden '' . Ekstrohm lay in his bunk and thought , the camp is quiet . The Earthmen made camp outside the spaceship . There was no reason to leave the comfortable quarters inside the ship , except that , faced with a possibility of sleeping on solid ground , they simply had to get out . The camp was a cluster of aluminum bubbles , ringed with a spy web to alert the Earthmen to the approach of any being . Each man had a bubble to himself , privacy after the long period of enforced intimacy on board the ship . Ekstrohm lay in his bunk and listened to the sounds of the night on Yancey-6 138 . There was a keening of wind , and a cracking of the frozen ground . Insects there were on the world , but they were frozen solid during the night , only to revive and thaw in the morning sun . The bunk he lay on was much more uncomfortable than the acceleration couches on board . Yet he knew the others were sleeping more soundly , now that they had renewed their contact with the matter that had birthed them to send them riding high vacuum . Ekstrohm was not asleep . Now there could be an end to pretending . He threw off the light blanket and swung his feet off the bunk , to the floor . Ekstrohm stood up . There was no longer any need to hide . But what was there to do ? ? What had changed for him ? ? He no longer had to lie in his bunk all night , his eyes closed , pretending to sleep . In privacy he could walk around , leave the light on , read . It was small comfort for insomnia . Ekstrohm never slept . Some doctors had informed him he was mistaken about this . Actually , they said , he did sleep , but so shortly and fitfully that he forgot . Others admitted he was absolutely correct -- he never slept . His body processes only slowed down enough for him to dispell fatigue poisons . Occasionally he fell into a waking , gritty-eyed stupor ; ; but he never slept . Never at all . Naturally , he couldn't let his shipmates know this . Insomnia would ground him from the Exploration Service , on physiological if not psychological grounds . He had to hide it . Over the years , he had had buddies in space in whom he thought he could confide . The buddies invariably took advantage of him . Since he couldn't sleep anyway , he might as well stand their watches for them or write their reports . Where the hell did he get off threatening to report any laxness on their part to the captain ? ? A man with insomnia had better avoid bad dreams of that kind if he knew what was good for him . Ekstrohm had to hide his secret . In a camp , instead of shipboard , hiding the secret was easier . But the secret itself was just as hard . Ekstrohm picked up a lightweight no-back from the ship's library , a book by Bloch , the famous twentieth century expert on sex . He scanned a few lines on the social repercussions of a celebrated nineteenth century sex murderer , but he couldn't seem to concentrate on the weighty , pontifical , ponderous style . On impulse , he flipped up the heat control on his coverall and slid back the hatch of the bubble . Ekstrohm walked through the alien glass and looked up at the unfamiliar constellations , smelling the frozen sterility of the thin air . Behind him , his mates stirred without waking . Ekstrohm was startled in the morning by a banging on the hatch of his bubble . It took him a few seconds to put his thoughts in order , and then he got up from the bunk where he had been resting , sleeplessly . The angry burnt-red face of Ryan greeted him . `` Okay , Stormy , this isn't the place for fun and games . What did you do with them '' ? ? `` Do with what '' ? ? `` The dead beasties . All the dead animals laying around the ship '' . `` What are you talking about , Ryan ? ? What do you think I did with them '' ? ? `` I don't know . All I know is that they are gone '' . `` Gone '' ? ? Ekstrohm shouldered his way outside and scanned the veldt . There was no ring of animal corpses . Nothing . Nothing but wispy grass whipping in the keen breeze . `` I'll be damned '' , Ekstrohm said . `` You are right now , buddy . ExPe doesn't like anybody mucking up primary evidence '' . `` Where do you get off , Ryan '' ? ? Ekstrohm demanded . `` Why pick me for your patsy ? ? This has got to be some kind of local phenomenon . Why accuse a shipmate of being behind this '' ? ? `` Listen , Ekstrohm , I want to give you the benefit of every doubt . But you aren't exactly the model of a surveyor , you know . You've been riding on a pink ticket for six years , you know that '' . `` No '' , Ekstrohm said , `` No , I didn't know that '' . `` You've been hiding things from me and Nogol every jump we've made with you . Now comes this ! ! It fits the pattern of secrecy and stealth you've been involved in '' . `` What could I do with your lousy dead bodies ? ? What would I want with them '' ? ? `` All I know is that you were outside the bubbles last night , and you were the only sentient being who came in or out of our alarm web . The tapes show that . Now all the bodies are missing , like they got up and walked away '' . It was not a new experience to Ekstrohm . No . Suspicion wasn't new to him at all . `` Ryan , there are other explanations for the disappearance of the bodies . Look for them , will you ? ? I give you my word I'm not trying to pull some stupid kind of joke , or to deliberately foul up the expedition . Take my word , can't you '' ? ? Ryan shook his head . `` I don't think I can . There's still such a thing as mental illness . You may not be responsible '' . Ekstrohm scowled . `` Don't try anything violent , Stormy . I outweigh you fifty pounds and I'm fast for a big man '' . `` I wasn't planning on jumping you . Why do you have to jump me the first time something goes wrong ? ? She lived and was given a name . Helva . For her first three vegetable months she waved her crabbed claws , kicked weakly with her clubbed feet and enjoyed the usual routine of the infant . She was not alone for there were three other such children in the big city's special nursery . Soon they all were removed to Central Laboratory School where their delicate transformation began . One of the babies died in the initial transferral but of Helva's `` class '' , seventeen thrived in the metal shells . Instead of kicking feet , Helva's neural responses started her wheels ; ; instead of grabbing with hands , she manipulated mechanical extensions . As she matured , more and more neural synapses would be adjusted to operate other mechanisms that went into the maintenance and running of a space ship . For Helva was destined to be the `` brain '' half of a scout ship , partnered with a man or a woman , whichever she chose , as the mobile half . She would be among the elite of her kind . Her initial intelligence tests registered above normal and her adaptation index was unusually high . As long as her development within her shell lived up to expectations , and there were no side-effects from the pituitary tinkering , Helva would live a rewarding , rich and unusual life , a far cry from what she would have faced as an ordinary , `` normal '' being . However , no diagram of her brain patterns , no early I.Q. tests recorded certain essential facts about Helva that Central must eventually learn . They would have to bide their official time and see , trusting that the massive doses of shell-psychology would suffice her , too , as the necessary bulwark against her unusual confinement and the pressures of her profession . A ship run by a human brain could not run rogue or insane with the power and resources Central had to build into their scout ships . Brain ships were , of course , long past the experimental stages . Most babes survived the techniques of pituitary manipulation that kept their bodies small , eliminating the necessity of transfers from smaller to larger shells . And very , very few were lost when the final connection was made to the control panels of ship or industrial combine . Shell people resembled mature dwarfs in size whatever their natal deformities were , but the well-oriented brain would not have changed places with the most perfect body in the Universe . So , for happy years , Helva scooted around in her shell with her classmates , playing such games as Stall , Power-Seek , studying her lessons in trajectory , propulsion techniques , computation , logistics , mental hygiene , basic alien psychology , philology , space history , law , traffic , codes : all the et ceteras that eventually became compounded into a reasoning , logical , informed citizen . Not so obvious to her , but of more importance to her teachers , Helva ingested the precepts of her conditioning as easily as she absorbed her nutrient fluid . She would one day be grateful to the patient drone of the sub-conscious-level instruction . Helva's civilization was not without busy , do-good associations , exploring possible inhumanities to terrestrial as well as extraterrestrial citizens . One such group got all incensed over shelled `` children '' when Helva was just turning fourteen . When they were forced to , Central Worlds shrugged its shoulders , arranged a tour of the Laboratory Schools and set the tour off to a big start by showing the members case histories , complete with photographs . Very few committees ever looked past the first few photos . Most of their original objections about `` shells '' were overridden by the relief that these hideous ( to them ) bodies were mercifully concealed . Helva's class was doing Fine Arts , a selective subject in her crowded program . She had activated one of her microscopic tools which she would later use for minute repairs to various parts of her control panel . Her subject was large -- a copy of the Last Supper -- and her canvas , small -- the head of a tiny screw . She had tuned her sight to the proper degree . As she worked she absentmindedly crooned , producing a curious sound . Shell people used their own vocal cords and diaphragms but sound issued through microphones rather than mouths . Helva's hum then had a curious vibrancy , a warm , dulcet quality even in its aimless chromatic wanderings . `` Why , what a lovely voice you have '' , said one of the female visitors . Helva `` looked '' up and caught a fascinating panorama of regular , dirty craters on a flaky pink surface . Her hum became a gurgle of surprise . She instinctively regulated her `` sight '' until the skin lost its cratered look and the pores assumed normal proportions . `` Yes , we have quite a few years of voice training , madam '' , remarked Helva calmly . `` Vocal peculiarities often become excessively irritating during prolonged intra-stellar distances and must be eliminated . I enjoyed my lessons '' . Although this was the first time that Helva had seen unshelled people , she took this experience calmly . Any other reaction would have been reported instantly . `` I meant that you have a nice singing voice dear '' , the lady amended . `` Thank you . Would you like to see my work '' ? ? Helva asked , politely . She instinctively sheered away from personal discussions but she filed the comment away for further meditation . `` Work '' ? ? Asked the lady . `` I am currently reproducing the Last Supper on the head of a screw '' . `` No , I say '' , the lady twittered . Helva turned her vision back to magnification and surveyed her copy critically . `` Of course , some of my color values do not match the old Master's and the perspective is faulty but I believe it to be a fair copy '' . The lady's eyes , unmagnified , bugged out . `` Oh , I forget '' , and Helva's voice was really contrite . If she could have blushed , she would have . `` You people don't have adjustable vision '' . The monitor of this discourse grinned with pride and amusement as Helva's tone indicated pity for the unfortunate . `` Here , this will help '' , suggested Helva , substituting a magnifying device in one extension and holding it over the picture . In a kind of shock , the ladies and gentlemen of the committee bent to observe the incredibly copied and brilliantly executed Last Supper on the head of a screw . `` Well '' , remarked one gentleman who had been forced to accompany his wife , `` the good Lord can eat where angels fear to tread '' . `` Are you referring , sir '' , asked Helva politely , `` to the Dark Age discussions of the number of angels who could stand on the head of a pin '' ? ? `` I had that in mind '' . `` If you substitute ' atom ' for ' angel ' , the problem is not insoluble , given the metallic content of the pin in question '' . `` Which you are programed to compute '' ? ? `` Of course '' . `` Did they remember to program a sense of humor , as well , young lady '' ? ? `` We are directed to develop a sense of proportion , sir , which contributes the same effect '' . The good man chortled appreciatively and decided the trip was worth his time . If the investigation committee spent months digesting the thoughtful food served them at the Laboratory School , they left Helva with a morsel as well . `` Singing '' as applicable to herself required research . She had , of course , been exposed to and enjoyed a music appreciation course which had included the better known classical works such as `` Tristan und Isolde '' , `` Candide '' , `` Oklahoma '' , `` Nozze de Figaro '' , the atomic age singers , Eileen Farrell , Elvis Presley and Geraldine Todd , as well as the curious rhythmic progressions of the Venusians , Capellan visual chromatics and the sonic concerti of the Altairians . But `` singing '' for any shell person posed considerable technical difficulties to be overcome . Shell people were schooled to examine every aspect of a problem or situation before making a prognosis . Balanced properly between optimism and practicality , the nondefeatist attitude of the shell people led them to extricate themselves , their ships and personnel , from bizarre situations . Therefore to Helva , the problem that she couldn't open her mouth to sing , among other restrictions , did not bother her . She would work out a method , by-passing her limitations , whereby she could sing . She approached the problem by investigating the methods of sound reproduction through the centuries , human and instrumental . Her own sound production equipment was essentially more instrumental than vocal . Breath control and the proper enunciation of vowel sounds within the oral cavity appeared to require the most development and practice . Shell people did not , strictly speaking , breathe . For their purposes , oxygen and other gases were not drawn from the surrounding atmosphere through the medium of lungs but sustained artificially by solution in their shells . After experimentation , Helva discovered that she could manipulate her diaphragmic unit to sustain tone . By relaxing the throat muscles and expanding the oral cavity well into the frontal sinuses , she could direct the vowel sounds into the most felicitous position for proper reproduction through her throat microphone . She compared the results with tape recordings of modern singers and was not unpleased although her own tapes had a peculiar quality about them , not at all unharmonious , merely unique . Acquiring a repertoire from the Laboratory library was no problem to one trained to perfect recall . She found herself able to sing any role and any song which struck her fancy . It would not have occurred to her that it was curious for a female to sing bass , baritone , tenor , alto , mezzo , soprano and coloratura as she pleased . It was , to Helva , only a matter of the correct reproduction and diaphragmic control required by the music attempted . If the authorities remarked on her curious avocation , they did so among themselves . Shell people were encouraged to develop a hobby so long as they maintained proficiency in their technical work . On the anniversary of her sixteenth year in her shell , Helva was unconditionally graduated and installed in her ship , the Aj . Her permanent titanium shell was recessed behind an even more indestructible barrier in the central shaft of the scout ship . The neural , audio , visual and sensory connections were made and sealed . Her extendibles were diverted , connected or augmented and the final , delicate-beyond-description brain taps were completed while Helva remained anesthetically unaware of the proceedings . When she awoke , she was the ship . Her brain and intelligence controlled every function from navigation to such loading as a scout ship of her class needed . She could take care of herself and her ambulatory half , in any situation already recorded in the annals of Central Worlds and any situation its most fertile minds could imagine . Her first actual flight , for she and her kind had made mock flights on dummy panels since she was eight , showed her complete mastery of the techniques of her profession . She was ready for her great adventures and the arrival of her mobile partner . There were nine qualified scouts sitting around collecting base pay the day Helva was commissioned . There were several missions which demanded instant attention but Helva had been of interest to several department heads in Central for some time and each man was determined to have her assigned to his section . Consequently no one had remembered to introduce Helva to the prospective partners . The ship always chose its own partner . Had there been another `` brain '' ship at the Base at the moment , Helva would have been guided to make the first move . As it was , while Central wrangled among itself , Robert Tanner sneaked out of the pilots' barracks , out to the field and over to Helva's slim metal hull . `` Hello , anyone at home '' ? ? Tanner wisecracked . `` Of course '' , replied Helva logically , activating her outside scanners . `` Are you my partner '' ? ? She asked hopefully , as she recognized the Scout Service uniform . `` All you have to do is ask '' , he retorted hopefully . `` No one has come . I thought perhaps there were no partners available and I've had no directives from Central '' . Even to herself Helva sounded a little self-pitying but the truth was she was lonely , sitting on the darkened field . Always she had had the company of other shells and more recently , technicians by the score . The sudden solitude had lost its momentary charm and become oppressive . `` No directives from Central is scarcely a cause for regret , but there happen to be eight other guys biting their fingernails to the quick just waiting for an invitation to board you , you beautiful thing '' . It would have killed you in the cabin . Do you have anything for me '' ? ? Mercer stammered , not knowing what B'dikkat meant , and the two-nosed man answered for him , `` I think he has a nice baby head , but it isn't big enough for you to take yet '' . Mercer never noticed the needle touch his arm . B'dikkat had turned to the next knot of people when the super-condamine hit Mercer . He tried to run after B'dikkat , to hug the lead spacesuit , to tell B'dikkat that he loved him . He stumbled and fell , but it did not hurt . The many-bodied girl lay near him . Mercer spoke to her . `` Isn't it wonderful ? ? You're beautiful , beautiful , beautiful . I'm so happy to be here '' . The woman covered with growing hands came and sat beside them . She radiated warmth and good fellowship . Mercer thought that she looked very distinguished and charming . He struggled out of his clothes . It was foolish and snobbish to wear clothing when none of these nice people did . The two women babbled and crooned at him . With one corner of his mind he knew that they were saying nothing , just expressing the euphoria of a drug so powerful that the known universe had forbidden it . With most of his mind he was happy . He wondered how anyone could have the good luck to visit a planet as nice as this . He tried to tell the Lady Da , but the words weren't quite straight . A painful stab hit him in the abdomen . The drug went after the pain and swallowed it . It was like the cap in the hospital , only a thousand times better . The pain was gone , though it had been crippling the first time . He forced himself to be deliberate . He rammed his mind into focus and said to the two ladies who lay pinkly nude beside him in the desert , `` That was a good bite . Maybe I will grow another head . That would make B'dikkat happy '' ! ! The Lady Da forced the foremost of her bodies in an upright position . Said she , `` I'm strong , too . I can talk . Remember , man , remember . People never live forever . We can die , too , we can die like real people . I do so believe in death '' ! ! Mercer smiled at her through his happiness . `` Of course you can . But isn't this nice '' With this he felt his lips thicken and his mind go slack . He was wide awake , but he did not feel like doing anything . In that beautiful place , among all those companionable and attractive people , he sat and smiled . B'dikkat was sterilizing his knives . Mercer wondered how long the super-condamine had lasted him . He endured the ministrations of the dromozoa without screams or movement . The agonies of nerves and itching of skin were phenomena which happened somewhere near him , but meant nothing . He watched his own body with remote , casual interest . The Lady Da and the hand-covered woman stayed near him . After a long time the half-man dragged himself over to the group with his powerful arms . Having arrived he blinked sleepily and friendlily at them , and lapsed back into the restful stupor from which he had emerged . Mercer saw the sun rise on occasion , closed his eyes briefly , and opened them to see stars shining . Time had no meaning . The dromozoa fed him in their mysterious way ; ; the drug canceled out his needs for cycles of the body . At last he noticed a return of the inwardness of pain . The pains themselves had not changed ; ; he had . He knew all the events which could take place on Shayol . He remembered them well from his happy period . Formerly he had noticed them -- now he felt them . He tried to ask the Lady Da how long they had had the drug , and how much longer they would have to wait before they had it again . She smiled at him with benign , remote happiness ; ; apparently her many torsos , stretched out along the ground , had a greater capacity for retaining the drug than did his body . She meant him well , but was in no condition for articulate speech . The half-man lay on the ground , arteries pulsating prettily behind the half-transparent film which protected his abdominal cavity . Mercer squeezed the man's shoulder . The half-man woke , recognized Mercer and gave him a healthily sleepy grin . `` ' A good morrow to you , my boy . That's out of a play . Did you ever see a play '' ? ? `` You mean a game with cards '' ? ? `` No '' , said the half-man , `` a sort of eye-machine with real people doing the figures '' . `` I never saw that '' , said Mercer , `` but I '' -- `` But you want to ask me when B'dikkat is going to come back with the needle '' . `` Yes '' , said Mercer , a little ashamed of his obviousness . `` Soon '' , said the half-man . That's why I think of plays . We all know what is going to happen . We all know when it is going to happen . We all know what the dummies will do '' -- he gestured at the hummocks in which the decorticated men were cradled -- `` and we all know what the new people will ask . But we never know how long a scene is going to take '' . `` What's a ' scene ' '' ? ? Asked Mercer . `` Is that the name for the needle '' ? ? The half-man laughed with something close to real humor . `` No , no , no . You've got the lovelies on the brain . A scene is just a part of a play . I mean we know the order in which things happen , but we have no clocks and nobody cares enough to count days or to make calendars and there's not much climate here , so none of us know how long anything takes . The pain seems short and the pleasure seems long . I'm inclined to think that they are about two Earth-weeks each '' . Mercer did not know what an `` Earth-week '' was , since he had not been a well-read man before his conviction , but he got nothing more from the half-man at that time . The half-man received a dromozootic implant , turned red in the face , shouted senselessly at Mercer , `` Take it out , you fool ! ! Take it out of me '' ! ! When Mercer looked on helplessly , the half-man twisted over on his side , his pink dusty back turned to Mercer , and wept hoarsely and quietly to himself . Mercer himself could not tell how long it was before B'dikkat came back . It might have been several days . It might have been several months . Once again B'dikkat moved among them like a father ; ; once again they clustered like children . This time B'dikkat smiled pleasantly at the little head which had grown out of Mercer's thigh -- a sleeping child's head , covered with light hair on top and with dainty eyebrows over the resting eyes . Mercer got the blissful needle . When B'dikkat cut the head from Mercer's thigh , he felt the knife grinding against the cartilage which held the head to his own body . He saw the child-face grimace as the head was cut ; ; he felt the far , cool flash of unimportant pain , as B'dikkat dabbed the wound with a corrosive antiseptic which stopped all bleeding immediately . The next time it was two legs growing from his chest . Then there had been another head beside his own . Or was that after the torso and legs , waist to toe-tips , of the little girl which had grown from his side ? ? He forgot the order . He did not count time . Lady Da smiled at him often , but there was no love in this place . She had lost the extra torsos . In between teratologies , she was a pretty and shapely woman ; ; but the nicest thing about their relationship was her whisper to him , repeated some thousands of time , repeated with smiles and hope , `` People never live forever '' . She found this immensely comforting , even though Mercer did not make much sense out of it . Thus events occurred , and victims changed in appearance , and new ones arrived . Sometimes B'dikkat took the new ones , resting in the everlasting sleep of their burned-out brains , in a ground-truck to be added to other herds . The bodies in the truck threshed and bawled without human speech when the dromozoa struck them . Finally , Mercer did manage to follow B'dikkat to the door of the cabin . He had to fight the bliss of super-condamine to do it . Only the memory of previous hurt , bewilderment and perplexity made him sure that if he did not ask B'dikkat when he , Mercer , was happy , the answer would no longer be available when he needed it . Fighting pleasure itself , he begged B'dikkat to check the records and to tell him how long he had been there . B'dikkat grudgingly agreed , but he did not come out of the doorway . He spoke through the public address box built into the cabin , and his gigantic voice roared out over the empty plain , so that the pink herd of talking people stirred gently in their happiness and wondered what their friend B'dikkat might be wanting to tell them . When he said it , they thought it exceedingly profound , though none of them understood it , since it was simply the amount of time that Mercer had been on Shayol : `` Standard years -- eighty-four years , seven months , three days , two hours , eleven and one half minutes . Good luck , fellow '' . Mercer turned away . The secret little corner of his mind , which stayed sane through happiness and pain , made him wonder about B'dikkat . What persuaded the cow-man to remain on Shayol ? ? What kept him happy without super-condamine ? ? Was B'dikkat a crazy slave to his own duty or was he a man who had hopes of going back to his own planet some day , surrounded by a family of little cow-people resembling himself ? ? Mercer , despite his happiness , wept a little at the strange fate of B'dikkat . His own fate he accepted . He remembered the last time he had eaten -- actual eggs from an actual pan . The dromozoa kept him alive , but he did not know how they did it . He staggered back to the group . The Lady Da , naked in the dusty plain , waved a hospitable hand and showed that there was a place for him to sit beside her . There were unclaimed square miles of seating space around them , but he appreciated the kindliness of her gesture none the less . 4 , The years , if they were years , went by . The land of Shayol did not change . Sometimes the bubbling sound of geysers came faintly across the plain to the herd of men ; ; those who could talk declared it to be the breathing of Captain Alvarez . There was night and day , but no setting of crops , no change of season , no generations of men . Time stood still for these people , and their load of pleasure was so commingled with the shocks and pains of the dromozoa that the words of the Lady Da took on very remote meaning . `` People never live forever '' . Her statement was a hope , not a truth in which they could believe . They did not have the wit to follow the stars in their courses , to exchange names with each other , to harvest the experience of each for the wisdom of all . There was no dream of escape for these people . Though they saw the old-style chemical rockets lift up from the field beyond B'dikkat's cabin , they did not make plans to hide among the frozen crop of transmuted flesh . Far long ago , some other prisoner than one of these had tried to write a letter . His handwriting was on a rock . Mercer read it , and so had a few of the others , but they could not tell which man had done it . Nor did they care . The letter , scraped on stone , had been a message home . They could still read the opening : `` Once , I was like you , stepping out of my window at the end of day , and letting the winds blow me gently toward the place I lived in . Once , like you , I had one head , two hands , ten fingers on my hands . The front part of my head was called a face , and I could talk with it . Now I can only write , and that only when I get out of pain . Dan Morgan told himself he would forget Ann Turner . He was well rid of her . He certainly didn't want a wife who was fickle as Ann . If he had married her , he'd have been asking for trouble . But all of this was rationalization . Sometimes he woke up in the middle of the night thinking of Ann , and then could not get back to sleep . His plans and dreams had revolved around her so much and for so long that now he felt as if he had nothing . The easiest thing would be to sell out to Al Budd and leave the country , but there was a stubborn streak in him that wouldn't allow it . The best antidote for the bitterness and disappointment that poisoned him was hard work . He found that if he was tired enough at night , he went to sleep simply because he was too exhausted to stay awake . Each day he found himself thinking less often of Ann ; ; each day the hurt was a little duller , a little less poignant . He had plenty of work to do . Because the summer was unusually dry and hot , the spring produced a smaller stream than in ordinary years . The grass in the meadows came fast , now that the warm weather was here . He could not afford to lose a drop of the precious water , so he spent most of his waking hours along the ditches in his meadows . He had no idea how much time Budd would give him . In any case , he had no intention of being caught asleep , so he carried his revolver in its holster on his hip and he took his Winchester with him and leaned it against the fence . He stopped every few minutes and leaned on his shovel as he studied the horizon , but nothing happened , each day dragging out with monotonous calm . When , in late afternoon on the last day in June , he saw two people top the ridge to the south and walk toward the house , he quit work immediately and strode to his rifle . It could be some kind of trick Budd had thought up . No one walked in this country , least of all Ed Dow or Dutch Renfro or any of the rest of the Bar B crew . Morgan watched the two figures for a time , puzzled . When they were closer and he saw that one was a woman , he was more puzzled than ever . He cleaned his shovel , left it against the fence , picked up his Winchester , and started downstream . His visitors had crawled through the south fence and were crossing the meadow , angling toward the house . Now he saw that both the man and woman were moving slowly and irregularly , staggering , as if they found it a struggle to remain on their feet . Reaching the house ahead of them , he waited with his Winchester in his hands . They crawled through the north fence and came on toward him , and now he saw that both were young , not more than nineteen or twenty . They were dirty , their clothes were torn , and the girl was so exhausted that she fell when she was still twenty feet from the front door . She lay there , making no effort to get back on her feet . The boy came on to the porch and sat down , his gaze on Morgan as if half expecting him to shoot and not really caring . Morgan hesitated , thinking that if this was a trick , it was a good one . He didn't think it was possible for this couple to be pretending . The boy licked his dry lips . He asked , `` Could we have a drink '' ? ? Morgan jerked his head toward the front door . `` In the kitchen '' , he said . Leaning his Winchester against the front of the house , he walked to the girl . `` Get up . There's water in the house '' . She didn't move or say anything . Her eyes were glazed as if she didn't hear or even see him . She had reached a point at which she didn't even care how she looked . Her face was very thin , and burned by the sun until much of the skin was dead and peeling , the new skin under it red and angry . Her blond hair was frowzy , her dress torn in several places , and her shoes were so completely worn out that they were practically no protection . It must have hurt her even to walk , for the sole was completely off her left foot and Morgan saw that it was bruised and bleeding . He picked her up , sliding one hand under her shoulders , the other under her knees , and carried her into the house . She was amazingly light , and so relaxed in his arms that he wasn't even sure she was conscious . Any lingering suspicion that this was a trick Al Budd had thought up was dispelled . No girl would go this far to fool a man so she could kill him . Besides , she had a sweet face that attracted him . He put her down on the couch , and going into the kitchen , saw that the boy had dropped into a chair beside the table . They looked a good deal alike , Morgan thought . Both had blonde hair and blue eyes , and there was even a faint similarity of features . Morgan filled the dipper from the water bucket on the shelf , went back into the front room , lifted the girl's head , and held the edge of the dipper to her mouth . She drank greedily , and murmured , `` Thank you '' , as he lowered her head . He stood looking down at her for a moment , wondering what could have reduced her to this condition . He had seen a few nester wagons go through the country , the families almost starving to death , but he had never seen any of them on foot and as bad off as these two . The girl dropped off to sleep . Morgan returned to the kitchen , built a fire , and carried in several buckets of water from the spring which he poured into the copper boiler that he had placed on the stove . He brought his Winchester in from the front of the house , then faced the boy . `` Who are you and what happened to you '' ? ? He asked . `` I'm Billy Jones '' , the boy answered . `` That's my wife Sharon . We ran out of money and we haven't eaten for two days '' . `` What are you doing here '' ? ? `` Are we in Wyoming '' ? ? Morgan nodded . `` About five miles north of the line '' . Jones sighed as if relieved . `` We've been looking for work , but all the ranchers have turned us down '' . `` You mean you dragged your wife all over hell's half-acre looking for work '' ? ? Morgan demanded . `` The town of Buckhorn's only about six miles from here . Why didn't you go there '' ? ? `` We didn't want town work '' , Jones said . `` This is a mighty empty country '' , Morgan said . `` There's only one more ranch three miles north of here . You'd have starved to death if you'd missed both places '' . `` Then we're lucky we got here . Could you give us a job , Mr. '' `` Morgan . Dan Morgan '' . He was silent a moment , thinking he could use a man this time of year , and if the girl could cook , it would give him more time in the meadows , but he knew nothing about the couple . They might kill him in his sleep , thinking there was money in the house . He dismissed the possibility at once . The girl's thin face haunted him . It wasn't the face of a killer . He wasn't so sure about the boy . He hadn't shaved for several weeks , his sparse beard giving his face a pathetic , woebegone expression . There was more to this than Jones had told him . They were running from something . He'd be an idiot to let them stay he thought , but he couldn't send them on , either . `` I could use some help '' , Morgan said finally , `` but I can't afford to pay you anything . I guess you'd better go on in the morning '' . `` We'll work for our keep '' , the boy said eagerly . `` I've been mucking in a mine in the San Juan , but I used to work on a ranch . Sharon , she's cooked in a restaurant . We'll work hard , Mr. Morgan '' . `` I'll see '' , Morgan said . `` Right now you need a meal and a bath . Your wife's in terrible shape '' . `` I know '' , Jones said dejectedly . Morgan filled the fire box with wood again , then started supper and set the table . When the meal was ready , he told Jones to wash up , and going into the front room , woke the girl . He said , `` I've got some supper ready '' . She rubbed her eyes and stretched , then sat up , her hands going to her hair . `` I'm a mess '' , she said , and suddenly she was alarmed . `` Who are you ? ? How did we get here '' ? ? `` I'm Dan Morgan . This is the Rafter Aj . You fell down in front of the house , and I carried you in . I gave you a drink and then you went to sleep '' . `` Oh '' . She stared at him , her eyes wide as she thought about what he had said ; ; then she murmured : `` You're very kind , Mr. Morgan . Do you take in all the strays who come by '' ? ? `` I don't have many strays coming to my front door '' , he said . `` Think you can walk to the table '' ? ? `` Of course '' . She got to her feet , staggered , and almost fell . He caught her by an arm and helped her into the kitchen . She sat down at the table , shaking her head . `` I'm sorry , Mr. Morgan . I'm usually a very strong woman , but I'm awfully tired '' . `` And hungry '' , he said . `` Start in . It's not much of a meal , but it's what I eat '' . `` Not much of a meal '' ? ? The girl cried . `` Mr. Morgan , it's the best-looking food I ever saw '' . He told himself he had never seen two people eat so much . When they were finally satisfied , Jones said , `` I think he's going to give us work '' . The grateful way she looked at Morgan made him ashamed of himself . When he saw the expression in her eyes , he knew he couldn't send them on . She said , `` I guess the Lord looks out for fools , drunkards , and innocents '' . Morgan laughed . `` Which are you '' ? ? `` We're not drunkards '' , she said . `` That's all I'm sure of '' . She helped him with the dishes , then he brought more water in from the spring before it got dark . He carried the tub from the back of the house where it hung from a nail in the wall . He said : `` You'll feel a lot better after you have a bath . Your feet are in bad shape , Mrs. Jones . You'll have to go to town to see the doc '' . `` No , she'll be all right '' , Jones said quickly . `` I mean , we don't have any way to get there and we can't expect you to quit work just to take us to town '' . `` We'll see '' , Morgan said . `` Could you find me a needle and thread '' ? ? The girl asked . `` My dress needs some work on it '' . He nodded and , going into the bedroom , brought a needle , thread , and scissors . He said : `` I'm going to bed '' . He nodded at the door in front of him . `` That's my spare bedroom . The bed isn't made , but you'll find plenty of blankets there '' . `` You're awfully kind '' , the girl said . `` We'll pay you back if you'll let us . Some way '' . `` It's all right '' , he said . `` I get up early . You'd better sleep '' . Jones followed him into the front room , closing the door behind him . He said : `` If it's all right with you , Mr. Morgan , I'll sleep out here on the couch . We haven't slept together since we started . I just can't take any chances on getting her pregnant , and if we were sleeping together '' He stopped , embarrassed , and Morgan said , `` I understand that , but I don't savvy why you'd go off and leave your jobs in the first place '' . `` We got fired '' , Jones said . `` We had to do something '' . They were a pair of lost , whipped kids , Morgan thought as he went to bed . Gavin paused wearily . `` You can't stay here with me . It's late and you said they'd be here by dawn '' . `` You can't make me go '' . Gavin sank down again into his chair and began to rock . He was thinking of Rittenhouse and how he had left him there , to rock to death on the porch of the Splendide . It was the only thing in his life for which he felt guilt . Beneath his black shirt his frail shoulders shook and croaks of pain broke from his throat , the stored pain shattering free in slow gasps , terrible to see . Clayton tried to call back the face of the man he had known . Against that other man he could rally his anger ; ; against this bent man in the chair he was powerless . Gavin's lips moved so that Clayton had to stoop to catch the words . `` Do you remember Big Charlie '' ? ? He whispered . `` He stuck with me all these years . Just a half-breed 'pache , never said much , never meant anythin to me , but he stuck with me . He got into a fight with Tom English , your brother's son . It was a fair fight , the boy provoked it -- Big Charlie told me so . I believed him . They killed Big Charlie , dumped his body in my rose garden two nights ago . My men , they all left me . Just cleared out . I didn't understand why , Clay . They just all cleared out . I treated them fair '' He wiped his lips with a sleeve , then stared at Clayton in a childish kind of wonder . `` Do you mean '' -- he asked almost shyly -- `` you want me to go with you , wherever you're goin '' ? ? `` Yes '' . `` You don't hate me any more '' ? ? Clayton choked , shook his head , murmuring , `` No '' . `` Come here '' . The old man beckoned with one finger and Clayton went forward to him . Gavin slipped his arms around his chest and hugged him fiercely . `` All my life '' , he said , `` I tried . I tried . I saw you driftin away -- but I tried . And you wanted no part of me when I had so much to give . Now there's nothin left of me . Laurel is gone , my men are gone , Ed is dead -- and you come to me , to help me . Oh ! ! God in Heaven , I can't refuse you now . That would mock me too much ! ! Can't let you go way from me again '' He closed his eyes , ashamed of his tears . `` I'll go , Clay '' . Clayton freed himself from the embrace and stepped back . The eyes followed him fearfully . `` The horses . There isn't much time . I'll saddle the horses and bring them round . You get ready '' He burst from the hot confinement of the room into the cold night air . Gavin's stallion was in the barn and he tightened the cinches over the saddle blanket , working by touch in the darkness , comforting the animal with easy words . When he had finished he led him and the mare to the porch . The stallion had smelled the mare coming into heat and began to paw the turf , shaking his head . Clayton looped the reins in a knot over the veranda post and patted the warm flesh of his neck . The mare had backed away . `` You take it easy , boy '' , Clayton whispered . `` She doesn't want you now . You take it easy , your time will come '' . Gavin stood on the porch , a thin figure . He had taken a carbine down from the wall and it trailed from his hand , the stock bumping on the wood floor . Clayton called to him and he came slowly down the steps . `` Clay '' , he said , `` where are we goin '' ? ? `` To a ranch in the valley . There's someone there I have to see . We may take her with us -- to California . I don't know yet , it's crazy ; ; I have to think about it . But California is where we're goin '' . `` California '' . Gavin began to nod . `` That's a new land . A man could make a mark there . Two men , together like us , we could do somethin fine out there , maybe find a place where no one's ever been . Start out fresh , the two of us , like nothin had ever happened '' . `` Yes , like a father and son '' . `` I made you what you are '' , Gavin whispered . `` I made you so you could stand up . I made you a man '' . `` Yes , Gavin , you did '' . He approached the horse and laid a hand on the stallion's quivering neck . `` Help me up , Clay . Help me up , I feel kind of stiff '' . Clayton lifted him gently into the saddle , like a child . `` I hate to leave my garden '' , Gavin said . `` They'll trample it down . I loved my garden '' . `` It will grow again -- in California '' . `` I loved this valley '' , he whispered huskily . `` Lived alone here for three years , before any man came . Lived alone by the river . It was nice then , so peaceful and quiet . There was no one but me . I don't want to leave it '' . Clayton swung into the saddle and whacked the stallion's rump . The two horses broke from the yard , from the circle of light cast by the lamp still burning in the house , into the darkness . Thirty-five they rode at a measured pace through the valley . Dawn would come soon and the night was at its coldest . The moon had sunk below the black crest of the mountains and the land , seen through eyes that had grown accustomed to the absence of light , looked primeval , as if no man had ever trespassed before . It looked as Gavin had first seen it years ago , on those nights when he slept alone by his campfire and waked suddenly to the hoot of an owl or the rustle of a blade of grass in the moon's wind -- a savage land , untenanted and brooding , too strong to be broken by the will of men . Gavin sighed bitterly . In that inert landscape the caravan of his desires passed before his mind . He saw them ambushed , strewn in the postures of the broken and the dying . In vain his mind groped to reassemble the bones of the relationships he had sought so desperately , but they would not come to life . The silence oppressed him , made him bend low over the horse's neck as if to hide from a wind that had begun to blow far away and was twisting slowly through the darkness in its slow search . They passed ranches that were framed dark gray against the black hills . Then at last the darkness began to dissolve . A bold line of violet broke loose from the high ridge of the mountains , followed by feathers of red that swept the last stars from the sky . The wan light spread over the ground and the valley revealed in the first glimmer the contours of trees and fences and palely shadowed gullies . They had been seen as soon as they left the ranch , picked out of the darkness by the weary though watchful eyes of two men posted a few hundred yards away in the windless shelter of the trees . The two men whipped their horses into town and flung themselves up the steps of the saloon , crying their intelligence . The men in Pettigrew's were tired from a night's drinking , their faces red and baggy . But the liquor had flushed their courage . They greeted the news angrily , as though they had been cheated of purpose . Lester heard their muttering , saw their eyes reveal their desire . He worked his tongue round and round in the hollow of his cheek and his voice came out of his throat , dry and cracked . `` He's leavin . That's what you wanted , isn't it ? ? Clayton is with him , takin him out of the valley . You can't '' -- `` Keep out of this '' , Purvis snarled . `` He's not your brother , he's Gavin's son . You see , he lied to us when he said he was leavin alone '' . Joe Purvis was thinking back many years . First he thought of the time he had ridden to Gavin and told him how his cattle were being rustled at the far end of the valley . He remembered Gavin's smirk , his own cringing feeling , his impotence . Then he thought of a time when Clayton's horse had fallen lame in the Gap . His wife had said to him : `` Nellie is in love with Clayton Roy . He wouldn't even dance with her at Gavin's party . He treats her like she was dirt . And you stand by like a fool and let him do it '' He remembered Clayton's mocking smile in the saloon when he had asked him what he would do if they brought their cattle to water . It was the night Clayton had tricked them in the poker game . `` You're Gavin's son '' , Joe Purvis had said . He turned to Lester . `` You brought him back to this valley thinkin he would help you find your boy . He meant to help Gavin all the time . He made a fool of you , Lester '' . He swung round to the other men -- `` We can catch him easy ! ! There are plenty of fresh horses halfway at my place . If we let them go , they won't stay away , they'll find men to ride with them and they'll be back . There's only one way they can get out now and that's through the Gap -- if we ride hard we can take them '' . Lester's hand fluttered to Cabot's shoulder . The boy jerked away . `` He killed Tom -- do you understand that '' ? ? Cabot turned back to the men and he was drunk with the thing they would do , wild to break from the cloying warmth of the saloon into the cold of the ebbing night . He fled through the door and down the steps , running , and the men grunted and followed , pushing Lester to one side where he backed against the wall with the sleeve of his jacket raised before his eyes to shut out the light . Purvis and Silas Pettigrew were the last to leave . They mounted up and rode slowly behind the others at a safe distance . Thirty-six in the cold dawn the mist swirled low to the ground , then rose with a gust of sudden wind to leave the valley clear . The clouds parted and hard gashes of sunlight swooped down to stain the earth with streaks of white and gold light so that the shadows of the running horses flowed like dark streams over the dazzling snow . When they turned in the saddle they could see the men behind them , strung out on the prairie in a flat black line . The wind of their running was cold and wild , the horses were lathered and their manes streamed like stiff black pennants in the wind . The mare began to tire and Clayton felt the spray of snow from the hoofs of Gavin's stallion . He looked over his shoulder at the thin dotting of pursuers . They neither gained nor fell back . He rode low on the mare's neck . Ahead of him Gavin turned slightly off the trail and pointed for the Gap , no more than a mile away . Gavin's face was bloodless with excitement . He did not look back ; ; he could feel more than hear the staccato beat of hoofs that fanned out across the prairie to the north . He knew who was riding after him -- the men he had known all his life , the men who had worked for him , sworn their loyalty to him . Now they were riding to kill him . And he was fleeing , running -- fleeing his death and his life at the same time . The land over which he sped was the land he had created and lived in : his valley . With every leaping stride of the horse beneath him he crossed one more patch of earth that had been his , that he would never see again . The Gap looming before him -- the place where had confronted Jack English on that day so many years ago -- was his exit from all that had meaning to him . California is too far , he thought . He would never reach California . He was too old -- when he passed up and through the corridor of pines that lined the trail he could see ahead , he was passing from life . The sentry was not dead . He was , in fact , showing signs of reviving . He had been carrying an Enfield rifle and a holstered navy cap-and-ball pistol . A bayonet hung in a belt scabbard . He was partially uniformed in a cavalry tunic and hat . Mike stripped these from him and donned them . He and Dean tied and gagged the man , using his belt and shirt for the purpose . They dragged him inside the building . Fiske joined them , unsteady on his feet . Julia , seeing the bandage , rushed to him . `` You are hurt '' ! ! She breathed . `` I never felt better in my life '' , Fiske blustered . He turned to Susan and kissed her on the cheek . `` Thank you , My dear '' , he said . `` You are very brave '' . Mike silenced them . `` We'll talk later . First , we've got to get out of here '' . `` We'll grab horses '' , Dean said . `` The main bunch is outside , but there are some over there inside the wall '' . Mike debated it , trying to decide whether Fiske was strong enough to ride . But it at least offered him a chance for living . He had none here . And , for the sake of Julia and Susan , it had to be tried . The guerrilla bivouac remained silent . Light showed in the orderly room across the parade ground . Someone evidently was on duty there . No doubt there would be men guarding the horses . About a dozen animals were held inside the stockade , as best Mike could make out in the moonlight . Evidently this was a precaution so that mounts would be available in an emergency . He handed the guard's rifle to Fiske . `` Dean and myself will try to cut out horses to ride '' , he said . `` We'll stampede the rest . You stay with the ladies . All of you be ready to ride hell for leather '' . He added , `` If this doesn't work out , the three of you barricade yourself in the house and talk terms with them '' . He handed the bayonet to Dean and kept the pistol . Susan halted Dean and kissed him . She clung to him , talking to him , and dabbing at her eyes . Mike turned away . He was thinking that the way she had responded to his own kiss hadn't meant what he had believed it had . He felt unutterably weary . Dean turned from Susan and took Julia Fortune in his arms . He kissed her also , and with deep tenderness . She too began to weep . He released her and joined Mike . `` All right '' , he said . Mike only said , `` Later '' . `` Be careful , McLish '' ! ! Susan said fiercely . `` The way you were careful '' ? ? He snorted . `` Running around in the moonlight almost naked and slugging a man with a rock '' ? ? He kept going . He wanted no more sentimental scenes with her . He might say or do something foolish . Something all of them would regret . He might tell her how sorry a spectacle she was making of herself , pretending to be blind to the way Julia Fortune had taken Dean's affections from her . And using him , Mike McLish , as a sop to her pride . He handed the bayonet to Dean and kept the pistol . `` Stay well back of me '' , he said . `` I'm going to walk up to the horses , bold as brass , pretending I'm one of the guerrillas . There's bound to be someone on guard , but the hat might fool them long enough for me to get close '' . Holding the pistol concealed , he walked to the rear wall of the stockade . It was pierced by a wagon gate built of two wings . One wing stood open . Mike passed through it and moved toward the dark mass of horses . They were tethered , army style , on stable lines . A voice spoke near-at-hand . `` Who's that '' ? ? Just me '' , Mike said . `` Is that you , Bill '' ? ? He located his man . The guard stood in the shadow of the stockade wall just out of reach of the moonlight . Mike kept walking and got within arm's reach before the man became suspicious and straightened from his lax slouch . Mike struck with the muzzle of the pistol . But the luck that had been running their way left him . The guard instinctively parried the blow with his rifle . He tried to veer the rifle around to fire into Mike's body . Mike , off balance , managed to bat the muzzle away a moment before it exploded . The bullet went wide . Mike swung the pistol in a savage backlash . This time it connected solidly on the man's temple , felling him . The explosion of the rifle had crashed against the walls of the stockade and the deep echoes were still rolling in the hills . The startled horses began rearing on their tethers . Dean came rushing up . `` Are you hit '' ? ? He demanded . `` No , but the fat's in the fire '' ! ! Mike said . `` There's no chance now of all of us getting away . You'll have to try it alone '' . The sentry's saddled horse stood picketed nearby , having been kept handy in case of need . Mike took the bayonet from Dean's hand and slashed the picket line . `` Up you go '' ! ! He said . `` Ride '' ! ! Dean resisted Mike's attempt to push him toward the horse . `` Why not you '' ? ? He protested . `` Dammit '' ! ! Mike said frantically . `` You're lighter than me . It's our only chance now . Try to find these Feds . The rest of us can fort up in the house and hang on until you get back . You're the one that's taking the big chance '' . Dean still hesitated , but Mike lifted him almost bodily into the saddle and thrust the reins in his hand . `` No telling how good this horse is '' , Mike panted . `` Favor him and save something in case you hit trouble . Watch out for Apaches when it comes daylight . Take the pistol . You might need it . We'll still have the rifle , and I might be able to round up some more . I'll stampede the rest of these horses so they can't chase you '' . Dean leaned from the saddle and gave him a mighty whack on the back . `` McLish '' , he said as he kicked the horse into motion , `` I'd be a mighty sad man if we never met again '' . Then he was on his way at a gallop . Mike ran down the line , slashing picket ropes with the bayonet . He lifted a screeching war whoop . That touched off a total stampede . He darted inside the stockade and freed the horses there . These poured through the gate and joined the flight . The animals thundered away into the moonlight , heading for the ridges . The guerrillas were swarming from their bivouac at the west end of the enclosure . `` Apaches '' ! ! Mike yelled . `` They're stealin' the stock '' ! ! He scuttled in shadow along the east wall of the stockade and then followed the south wall until he was at the rear of the two frame buildings . He crouched there . His shout had been taken up and repeated . The guerrillas were running across the parade ground and through the rear gate in the wake of the departing horses . All were carrying guns they had seized up , but they were half-clad or hardly clad at all . Durkin and Calhoun came running from the post . They had pistols in their hands . They bawled questions that were not answered in the uproar . They followed the others toward the east gate . Beyond the stockade rifles began to explode as some of the guerrillas fired at shadows that they imagined were Apaches . Mike made a dash to the rear of the frame buildings . He crawled beneath the two supply wagons which stood between the buildings and peered around a corner . The area was deserted . A man was standing in the open door of the lighted orderly room a few yards to Mike's left , but he , too , suddenly made up his mind and went racing to join the confused activity at the east end of the stockade . Mike crawled to the door and peered in . The orderly room seemed to be deserted . A lantern hung from a peg , giving light . Ducking inside , he found that three rifles were stacked in a corner . A brace of pistols , holstered on belts , hung from a peg , along with ammunition pouches . An ammunition case stood open , containing canisters which contained powder cartridges . Mike seized a blanket from a pallet in a corner , spread it on the floor and used it to form a bag in which he placed his booty . Shouldering the load he peered from the door . His looting of the orderly room had taken only a minute or two and the vicinity was still clear of guerrillas . He looked at the looming hoods of the supply wagons , struck by a new inspiration . He set his bundle down . Snatching the lantern from its peg , he shattered its globe with a blow against a post . He picked up the powder canister and ran out . Bursting paper cartridges , he scattered powder beneath the nearest wagon and dumped the contents of the canister upon it . He shouldered the blanket again , backed off , and tossed the lantern with its open wick beneath the wagon . He turned and raced across the parade ground toward the rock house . Powder flame gushed beneath the wagon . The stockade was brilliantly lighted and the guerrillas sighted him . They realized the truth . Bullets began to snap past him . One struck the muzzle of one of the rifles that projected from the shoulder pack . Its force spun him around , but he recovered and got into stride again . A bullet tore the earth from beneath his foot when he was a stride or two from safety . Another struck him heavily in the thigh and he went down . Guerrillas were racing toward him . Susan and Julia came from the door and dragged him with them . The three of them floundered through the door into the interior and fell in a heap . Susan bounced to her feet and slammed the door . She crouched aside as bullets beat at the portal , chewing into the planks . Some tore entirely through the whipsawed post oak . The iron hinges held , but the planks were in danger of being torn from the crossbars . Mike rolled to Susan , grasped her around the knees , dragging her off her feet . He hovered over her to shield her , for spent bullets were thudding against the rear walls . He peered from a loophole . Guerrillas were only a dozen yards away , charging the house . Mike snatched a pistol from the heap of scattered booty and fired . He dropped a man with the first bullet . At the same moment Wheeler Fiske fired the rifle Mike had given him and another guerrilla was hit . That halted the rush . The guerrillas scattered for cover . The wagons were burning fiercely . The mudwagon had caught fire also . The blaze was spreading to the frame buildings . The guerrillas realized they faced a new problem . `` Gawdamighty '' ! ! One screeched . `` There goes our grub an' ammunition '' ! ! `` Get a bucket line going '' ! ! Calhoun shouted . `` Hurry ! ! Hurry '' ! ! The guerrillas began a frantic search for pails in which to bring water from the spring . But what few containers they found were inadequate . Many of them , in increasing panic , came running with water in their hats in a ludicrous effort . Both buildings were in flames . The heat drove the guerrillas back . The roof of the command post began to buckle . `` Drag the wagons to the spring '' ! ! Lew Durkin yelled . `` Run 'em right into the spring ! ! Hustle '' ! ! One of the wagons erupted a massive pillar of flame . A sizable supply of powder had been touched off . The wagons and the coach were beyond saving and so were the buildings . The glow of the fire reached through the openings in the windows , giving light enough to examine Mike's wound . The bullet had torn through the flesh just above the knee , inflicting an ugly gash that was forming a pool of blood on the floor . But it had missed the bone and had passed on through . Susan and Julia ripped strips from their clothing and bound the injury . Mike tested the leg and found that he was able to hobble around on it . `` So it wasn't the earthquake that made him return to his village '' ! ! `` No . Now dammit , I don't want to go into any more explanations . Here comes Jason . Keep this to yourself '' . Reverend Jason , looking worried , hurried toward us . `` Anything wrong , cap'n ? ? The men seem to think so '' . `` Dirion found a large war party south of us . They'll probably attack at dawn '' , Montero said . He brushed past the clergyman and walked into the center of the camp . Using his hands as a trumpet he shouted , `` Fort up ! ! Fort up ! ! There's a large war party on their way '' ! ! For a second , engages , cooks , voyageurs appeared struck dumb . Then Little Billy began shouting orders to round up the ponies and fill the water buckets and for the cooks to hurry up with the meal . They all flew into action . `` That was a terrible thing to do '' , I said to Oso . The Aricaras treated us like friends . And here all the time you knew the Sioux would be using our rifles on them ! ! God , what a world you people live in '' . Oso gave me an unruffled look . `` Old Knife's got the largest war party ever seen on the river '' , he said calmly . `` What would you have done in Montero's moccasins ? ? Let Old Knife come up and kill you and your people , or would you steer him on someone else '' ? ? He shook his head . `` Mr. Manuel did that in the war . That's why the British never got the tribes to fight for the King . Mr. Manuel whispered in the ears of the Sioux that the Cheyennes were comin' to raid 'em for their horses . Then he went on to the Cheyennes and told them that the Sioux was goin' to move up . He did that with all the Nations . Hell , they were fightin' each other so hard they had no time for anyone else . The War Department wrote Mr. Manuel a letter and said he was a hero . I saw that letter . He carried it in a little wallet made of fish skin '' . `` But that was war '' , I said . `` There's no war on now '' . `` You're wrong , Matt . In this country there's a war on every time the grass turns green . First it was the Nations against themselves , then it was them against the whites . And it's goin' to go on like this year after year until the white people take over this land '' . I remember being told it would happen so fast people would think it took place overnight . `` That's why this company's important . Once we get over the mountains others will come along . That's why the Trust don't want us to make it . That bastard Chambers ! ! -- Old Knife's not the only chief he'll get to do his dirty work ! ! Before we get through he'll have the Blackfeet hankerin' for our hair and our goods . Well , talkin' ain't goin' to help -- let's fort up '' ! ! As I dug in behind one of the bales we were using as protection , I grudgingly found myself agreeing with Oso's logic , especially when I imagined what would have happened to Missy if Old Knife's large party of screeching warriors had overrun our company . For , unlike the Sioux and the Crows , the Aricaras are not great horsemen , nor are they aggressive like the savage Blackfeet . More of an agricultural nation , they have relied on their warriors only for defense and for survival in the endless wars of the plains . Still , I was disgusted with myself for agreeing with Montero's methods . Surprisingly , he had told the others what he had done . In the brief moment I had to talk to them before I took my post on the ring of defenses , I indicated I was sickened by the methods men employed to live and trade on the river . `` I think Montero did right '' , Amy said firmly . `` Let the savages kill each other . What do we care '' ? ? Reverend Jason was understandably bitter . `` It was a terrible thing to do . Those little children . '' But Oso replied calmly , `` Trouble ain't easy to dodge out in this country , rev'rend '' . 28 . Attack Gray Eyes attacked our camp just as the first pink threads stitched together the hills and the sky . Our camp was in the center of a wide valley . Montero had set up a strong position , using every bale and box we had in addition to barricades of logs and brush . He had ordered the ponies brought inside the fortified circle and had assigned Pierre and a band of picked engages the job of trying to keep them steady under fire . The pony herd was the one flaw in our defense ; ; the Rees undoubtedly would try to cut down as many of the animals as possible . Wildly bucking horses would make the position difficult to defend against charging warriors . The cooks had prepared one of the best meals we'd had in a long time , and on Montero's orders had baked enough bread to last the day . Buckets were filled , the herd fed and watered . The worst part had been the waiting ; ; although we didn't expect the attack before dawn , the long cloudy night , filled with the sounds of the industrious insects , seemed endless . Coyotes and hunting wolves sounded like signaling Indian scouts , the whinny of a restless pony made one's skin crawl . Oso slept unconcernedly , his rifle cradled in his arms ; ; I didn't catch a wink . Every time I closed my eyes , I saw Gray Eyes rushing at me with a knife . It was a relief when they finally came . They poured through the opening in the valley , then spread out in a long line to come at us , brandishing their lances and filling the morning with their spine-chilling scalp cry . `` Oso '' , Montero called `` I'll get Gray Eyes '' . `` That'll be a pleasure to see '' , the big black murmured as he stared down the barrel of his rifle . `` Hold your fire '' , Montero was shouting . `` Wait until my shot . I'll shoot the first man who doesn't '' . I could see them in my sights . They were about a mile off ; ; under me the ground quivered slightly . At first they were only feathers and dark indistinguishable faces and bodies , hunched over their horses' heads . Gradually they emerged as men . Gray Eyes was in the lead . His face was split by a vermilion streak , his eyes were pools of white ; ; jagged red and black medicine symbols covered his chest . He was naked except for a clout . Next to him was a young boy I was sure had sat near me at one of the trading sessions . His mouth was open , his neck corded with the strain of his screams . I found his chest in my sights . It had a red circle . The circle came nearer and nearer . My God , how long is he going to wait , I thought . Montero's rifle cracked . At first I thought he had missed . Gray Eyes remained erect . The feathered lance was still above his head . As he started to slump over , another warrior swung him onto his horse . I squeezed the trigger . At the last second I dropped my sights from the bare chest and bright red circle to the chest of his pony . I saw the pony fall like a stone and the young warrior flew over its head , bouncing like a rubber ball . He started to run but Oso's shot caught him on the wing . He jerked once in the grass and lay still . `` If you're goin' to kill 'em -- ! ! Kill 'em '' ! ! Oso growled . What else he said was lost in the rattle of gunfire on all sides . The Aricaras broke under the devastating fire , wheeled and retreated . `` Lead up ! ! Lead up ! ! They'll be back '' ! ! Montero was shouting . Far up the valley I could see the Rees circling and reorganizing . Out in front of our walls the grass was covered with dead and dying men , war shields , lances , blankets and wounded and dead horses . The morning air was filled with the sweetish odor of new-spilled blood , the acrid stench of frightened horses , and the bitterness of burned powder . A horse screamed as it twisted from side to side in a frenzy . A rifle cracked ; ; the square head fell over . One of the warriors suddenly leaped to his feet and began running across the valley to the trees that lined the small creek . His legs pumped furiously , his long black hair streamed out behind him . There was a ragged volley . He was dead before he hit the ground . `` For Christ's sake , don't waste your powder on one of 'em '' ! ! Montero shouted furiously . `` Wait for the charge ! ! The charge , I tell you '' ! ! The sharp cries at the end of the valley were faint . They grew louder as the Indians charged again . I could see their faces glistening with sweat and bear grease , their mouths open , shouting their spine-chilling cries . `` Gray Eyes is back , , Montero said . The war captain had been badly wounded and was fighting to hold his seat . I could see the blood running down his chest . He was riding between two warriors , who held him erect when he started to slump . I forgot to aim . In my sights I watched him looming bigger and bigger . Montero's shot had caught him high in the chest ; ; there was no doubt he was dying . Again we waited for Montero . This time he delayed so long that some of the engages shouted frantically , but they held their fire . The horses were only several lengths away when he fired . The bullet flung Gray Eyes from his horse . Our rolling volley swept most of the other riders from their mounts . But a few reached our wall . I heard the whir of an ax and a Canadian's face burst apart in a bloody spray . I saw Little Billy rise and fire almost point blank and an Indian's face became shattered flesh and bone . A second leaped from his horse to the top of the bale , firing four arrows in such rapid succession it didn't seem possible they were in flight . Men screamed . Oso reached up , jerked the buck from the bale and snapped his neck . Other Indians were running at the ponies , shrilling and waving blankets . Reverend Jason got one , the Canadians the others . I saw the clergyman kneel for a moment by the twitching body of the man he had shot , then run back to his position . The ponies were almost uncontrollable . The pall of dust they raised made it difficult to see when the Aricaras charged again . This time more of them hurdled the barrier . A small Indian dived at Montero , who caught him with a swift upward stroke of his rifle butt . It sounded like a man kicking a melon . Above me a dark rider was whipping his pony with a quirt in an attempt to hurdle the bales . Although my shot killed his horse , he rolled off the bale on top of me . I could smell woodsmoke , grease , and oil . His eyes were dark , fluid , fearful , and he gave a sigh as my knife went in . Coming over the wall he had seemed like a hideous devil . Now under me I could see him for what he really was , a boy dressed up in streaks of paint . The Aricaras made one last desperate charge . It was pitiful to see the thin ranks of warriors , old and young , wheeling and twisting their ponies frantically from side to side only to be tumbled bleeding from their saddles by the relentless slam , slam of the cruelly efficient Hawkinses . Others , badly wounded , gripped hands in manes , knees in bellies , held on as long as possible and then , weak from ghastly wounds , slipped sideways , slowly , almost thoughtfully , to be broken under the slashing hoofs . Some gracefully soared from the backs of their wounded , screaming mounts to make one last defiant charge before the lead split their hearts or tore their guts . None of them reached our walls again . The few survivors grudgingly turned away . In the distance we could hear the drums and the wail of the death song . She was carrying a quirt , and she started to raise it , then let it fall again and dangle from her wrist . `` I saw your fire '' , she said , speaking slowly , making an effort to control her anger . `` You could burn down this whole mountainside with a fire that size . It wouldn't matter to a fool like you . It would to me '' . `` All right '' , Wilson said quickly . `` The fire's too big . And I appreciate the advice '' . He was losing patience again . An hour before , with the children asleep and nothing but the strange darkness , he would have appreciated company . She had helped him change his mind . `` I'm not advising you '' , she said . `` I'm telling you . That fire's too big . Let it burn down . And make sure it's out when you leave in the morning '' . He was taken aback . It took him a long time to compose himself . `` There's some mistake '' , he said finally . `` You're right about the fire . It's bigger than it has to be , though I don't see where it's doing any harm . But you're wrong about the rest of it . I'm not leaving in the morning . Why should I ? ? I own the place '' . She showed her surprise by tightening the reins and moving the gelding around so that she could get a better look at his face . It didn't seem to tell her anything . She glanced around the clearing , taking in the wagon and the load of supplies and trappings scattered over the ground , the two kids , the whiteface bull that was chewing its cud just within the far reaches of the firelight . She studied it for a long time . Then she turned back to Wilson and smiled , and he wasn't quite sure what she meant by it . `` You own this place '' ? ? She said , and her tone had softened until it was almost friendly . `` You bought it '' ? ? `` From a man in St. Louis '' , Wilson said . `` Jake Carwood . Maybe you know him '' . The girl laughed . `` I know him . I ought to . My father ran him off here six years ago '' . Wilson didn't say anything . He stood watching the girl , wondering what was coming next . She had picked up the quirt and was twirling it around her wrist and smiling at him . `` Carwood didn't tell you that '' , she said . `` No '' , Wilson said . `` But it's understandable . It's not the kind of thing that a man would be proud of . And it doesn't make any difference . He sold me a clear title . I have it with me , right here . If you want to see '' -- `` Never mind '' , she said sternly . `` It wouldn't matter to my father , and not to me . I meant what I said about that fire . Be sure it's out when you leave . That's all . I'll let you go back to doing the dishes now '' . It was meant to insult him , and didn't quite succeed . He took the reins just below the bit and held them firmly , and it was his turn to smile now . `` I don't mind washing dishes now and then '' , he said pleasantly . `` It doesn't hurt . It might hurt you , though . Somebody might mistake you for a woman '' . He meant to say more , but he never got the chance . She was quick . She brought the quirt down , slashing it across his cheek , and he tried to step back . She swung the quirt again , and this time he caught her wrist and pulled her out of the saddle . She came down against him , and he tried to break her fall . He grabbed her by the shoulders and went down on one knee , taking her weight so that some of the wind was driven out of him . It made him a little sick , and he let go of her . He got up slowly , and she was already on her feet , and he stood facing her . He wiped the blood from his cheek . `` I ought to '' -- he said . He was shaking with anger , his breath coming in long , painful gasps . `` That quirt -- I ought to use it on you , where it would do the most good . If you were a man '' -- `` She isn't , mister '' . The voice came from behind him , and Wilson turned . The fire had gone down , and the man was only a shadow against the trees . But a moment later he brought his horse forward into the light , and Wilson had a good look at him . He was tall and dark-skinned , a half-breed , Wilson thought . And he was handsome , despite the long thin scar that slanted across his cheek . `` She's not a man , mister '' , he said . `` I am . If you've got any ideas '' . He raised the Winchester and pointed it at Wilson's chest . `` Put the rifle down , Joseph '' , the girl said . She seemed irritated . `` I thought I told you to stay home '' . The half-breed eased the Winchester down and rested it across his lap . The scar looked pure white in the half-darkness ; ; his eyes were black and deep-set , and expressionless . `` You shouldn't be riding up here after dark , Judith '' , he said quietly . `` I can take care of this . It's no job for you '' . The girl tapped the quirt impatiently against her knee and glared at him . He took it without flinching . `` I said go home , Joseph . You've got no business up here '' . The half-breed didn't answer this time . But the scar seemed to pull hard at the corner of his mouth , and his eyes were hurt and angry . It made Wilson wonder . He watched the half-breed as he turned silently . They could hear the pony's feet on the dry leaves for a while , then the sound faded out . Wilson brushed the dust from his coat . `` Who was that '' ? ? He asked . `` Your personal guard ? ? You're pretty hard on him '' . `` He works for my father '' , the girl said , and then seemed to change her mind . `` He's a friend . His name's Joseph Sanchez . Is there anything else you want to know '' ? ? `` Not now '' , Wilson said . `` I guess I'll find out soon enough . You've got blood on your cheek . Not yours . Mine . It must have got there when you fell against me '' . She wiped it off with the sleeve of her coat . `` I'll bet that's as close as you've been to a man since you were a baby '' , Wilson said . He saw her hand start to work down the leather thong toward the handle of the quirt , and he grabbed her wrist . `` Oh , no '' , he said , and he was without humor now . `` I've had enough of that . I've had enough of you . I don't know what goes on around here , and I don't care . I don't know what makes you think you can get away with this kind of business , and I don't care about that , either . You took me by surprise . But I'll know how to handle you next time '' . She brought up her free hand to hit him , but this time he was quicker . He side-stepped her blow and she fell , stumbling against the gelding . She finally regained her balance and got up in the saddle . Her hat had come off and fallen behind her shoulders , held by the string , and he could see her face more clearly than he had at any time before . He had forgotten that she was so pretty . But her prettiness was what he had noticed first , and all the other things had come afterward : cruelty , meanness , self-will . He had known women like that , one woman in particular . And one had been too many . He watched the girl until she had gone into the trees , and waited until he couldn't hear the sound of her horse any longer , then went up to where the children were sleeping . They weren't sleeping , of course , but they thought they were doing him a favor by pretending . He hadn't shown up too well in their eyes , letting himself be browbeaten by a woman . They expected greater things from him , regardless of how trying the circumstances , and they were disappointed . And determined not to show it . They lay a little too stiffly , with their eyes straining to stay closed . `` Go to sleep '' , he said . `` Both of you . There's better things to do than listen to something like that . I'll be down at the creek finishing the dishes , if you want me '' . He found the pan where he had dropped it and carried it back down to the stream . The coyote was calling again , and he hoped that this time there would be no other sounds to interrupt it . Not tonight , at any rate . He had a feeling that the girl meant trouble . If she did , he could stand it better in the light . He scrubbed absent-mindedly at the pans and reflected on how things had turned out . That afternoon when they had pulled up in front of the broken-down ranch house , his hopes had been high . Already some of the pain had gone from Amelia's death . Not all of it . There would still be plenty of moments of regret and sadness and guilty relief . But they were starting a new life . And they had almost everything they needed : land , a house , two whiteface bulls , three horses . The land wasn't all Wilson had expected of it . Six hundred and forty acres , the old man back in St. Louis had said ; ; good grass , good water . Well , the grass was there , though in some places the ground was too steep for a cow to get to it . The water was there , so much of it that it spread all through the dead orchard . And there was a house ; ; livable perhaps , but badly in need of repairs . In the last analysis , though , Wilson had little cause to complain . The place had been cheap -- just the little he had left after Amelia's burial -- and it would serve its purpose . There was only one place where Jake Carwood's description had gone badly awry : the peace and quiet . It hadn't started out that way . And he had a feeling -- thanks to the girl -- that things would get worse before they got better . 2 They had the house cleaned up by noon , and Wilson sent the boy out to the meadow to bring in the horses . He stood on the porch and watched him struggling with the heavy harness , and finally went over to help him . Kathy was already in the wagon . They were going to town , and they were both excited . Wilson backed the team into the traces , and wished they weren't going to town at all . He had an uneasy feeling about it . That girl last night , what was her name ? ? Judith Pierce . It was the only thing about her that was the least bit hard to remember . He finished with the team and filled his pipe and stood looking about him . He had spent two hours riding around the ranch that morning , and in broad daylight it was even less inviting than Judith Pierce had made it seem . There was brush , and stands of pine that no grass could grow under , and places so steep that cattle wouldn't stop to graze . But there was water . There was an artificial lake just out of sight in the first stand of trees , fed by a half dozen springs that popped out of the ground above the hillside orchard . Yes , there was plenty of water , too much , and that was probably the trouble . There were tracks of cattle all over his six hundred and forty acres . The first part of the road was steep , but it leveled off after the second bend and curled gradually into the valley . It was hotter once they reached the flat , and drier , but the grass was better . A warm breeze played across it , moving it like waves . A red-tailed hawk flew in behind them and stayed there , watching for any snakes or rabbits that they might stir up from the side of the road . It took them an hour before they came to the first houses of Kelseyville . The town was about what Wilson expected : one main street with its rows of false-fronted buildings , a water tower , a few warehouses , a single hotel ; ; all dusty and sunbaked . The place was quiet . Such was my state of mind that I did not question the possibility of this ; ; under the circumstances I was only too willing to confess all . I was nearly thirty at the time . I went to the hall in the afternoons only , on these preliminary matters . It was dark and , I sensed , very large ; ; only the counter at one end was lighted by a long fluorescent tube suspended directly above it . Sometimes I was aware of people moving about in the darkness . I would turn away from my writing in the hope of getting a good look at them but I never quite succeeded . A glimpse of three of four vague figures , at the most . Drifting here and there . Squatting , as if waiting . The pulsing glow of a cigarette . Since they could see me but I not them , their presence in the hall disturbed me . The clerk paid them no attention . This impressed me , until I realized how limited was his sphere of influence . His job simply consisted in registering new men . When the phone rang he answered it . His authority extended to the far edge of the counter , no further . None of the men hanging around the hall bothered to speak to him . Baldness was attacking his pate . He spoke to me in a gruff voice , an affectation which quite belied his personality . He wore his white shirt open at the neck , revealing a bit of scrawny pale chest underneath . It was obvious that he wished himself different from the sort of person he thought he was . But it was not easy for him and he often slipped . When one of the men in the hall behind us spat on the floor and scraped his boot over the gob of spittle I noticed how the clerk winced . I felt certain he was really a spineless little man . His hat ( the cause of his baldness ? ? ) hung on a hook on the wall , and underneath it I could see his tie , knotted , ready to be slipped over his head , a black badge of frayed respectability that ought never to have left his neck . The morning's tabloids were on the counter , and a stack of dog-eared men's magazines . On a shelf in the office behind the counter was a small radio dialed permanently on a station which broadcast only vulgar commercials and cheap popular music . Everything about the clerk was trivial . Once , pressing him , I learned that his job was only part-time , in the afternoons when nothing went on in the hall . Noticing my disappointment he attempted to salvage what scraps and shreds of authority he felt might still be clinging to his person . With distaste I saw him assume a pompous air . When he saw me coming he turned his radio off . He made a show of rearranging my forms on the shelf . He would pick up the ringing phone with studied negligence , then bark into it with gruff importance . What limited knowledge he possessed he forced upon me . In the mornings , I was informed , fluorescent tubes , similar to the one above the counter , illuminated the entire hall . They , and the two large fans which I could dimly see as daylight filtered through their vents , down at the far end of the hall , could be turned on by a master switch situated inside the office . He pointed out the switch to me and for a moment I foolishly believed that he would let deed follow words . I was shown , instead , a batch of white tickets of the sort handed out , he told me , every morning . Now , here was something of obvious importance to me , yet when I reached for the tickets he snatched them away from my hand . He couldn't afford to have anyone mess around with them , he said . Each of those tickets was of great value to its rightful recipient . I withdrew my hand . Later I would remember what this pompous little man had told me about the worth of a ticket . Having nothing else to do except wait for my forms to be processed , I gave myself over to speculations concerning the hall itself . When suitably lighted , what would it look like ? ? The presence of the two exhaust fans seemed to indicate that the hall could become crowded for air . One afternoon , upon receiving permission and the necessary instructions from the clerk , I had visited the toilet adjoining the hall . By counting the number of stalls and urinals I attempted to form a loose estimate of how many men the hall would hold at one time . For although I had crossed a corner of the hall on my way to the toilet I still could not tell for sure how far to the rear the darkness extended . I could observe the two fans down at the end , but their size in themselves meant nothing to me as long as I had no measure of comparison . I had for some time been hoping , in vain , for one of the dim figures to pass between the fan vents and myself . I knew that three or four of them were almost always present in the hall , but what they were doing , and exactly where , I could not tell . It was , I felt , possible that they were men who , having received no tickets for that day , had remained in the hall , to sleep perhaps , in the corners farthest removed from the counter with its overhead light . This light did not penetrate very far back into the hall , and my eyes were hindered rather than aided by the dim daylight entering through the fan vents when I tried to pick out whatever might be lying , or squatting , on the floor below . Also the clerk appeared to disapprove of my frequent curious glances back over my shoulder . No sooner would I turn my head away from the counter before he would address me , at times quite sharply , in order to bring back my attention . And I had hardly finished my business in the toilet on the aforementioned occasion when the lights in that place , like the hall lights controlled from the switch in the office , flicked off and on impatiently . This sort of petty vigilance annoyed me . I felt certain it was self-appointed . It sprang from a type of mentality I'd encountered often enough but certainly had not expected to find here . I decided to see no more of the clerk until the processing of my papers was completed . I felt strongly attached to the hall , however , and hardly a day passed when I did not go to look at it from a distance . I lived in a state of suspense because of it . I could not cling to my past nor did I wish to . I had signed it off on the forms . My future lay solely with the hall , yet what did I know about the hall at this point ? ? Although I had been inside it I had not yet seen it functioning . I wished to prepare myself but did not even know what sort of clothes I ought to be wearing . I did not despair , however ; ; far from it ! ! I was constantly searching for clues around the neighborhood of the hall . Though only a relatively short walk separated it from my own part of town , its character was wholly foreign to me . Large warehouses flanked the street on which the hall fronted . The river was only a few blocks away but an unbroken line of piers prevented me from seeing it . Sometimes I noticed the tops of ships' masts and funnels reaching above the pier roofs . The sounds issuing from beyond -- winches whirring , men shouting -- indicated great activity and excited me . The hall , on the other hand , appeared lifeless and deserted on these long waterfront afternoons . It resembled nothing I'd ever seen before . Its front was windowless , but irregularities in the masonry might be an indication that windows , now blinded , had once looked out upon the street . I kept circling the block hoping to see , from the street behind it , the rear of the hall . But it was not a tall structure and other buildings concealed it . For weeks I wandered about this neighborhood of warehouses and garages , truck terminals and taxi repair shops , gasoline pumps and longshoremen's lunch counters , yet never did I cease to feel myself a stranger there . I returned to the hall , despite my dislike for the clerk . As I had expected , he insisted that my visits to the hall would do nothing to further the process of my application . Meanwhile spring had passed well into summer . At last , when I put it to him directly , the clerk was forced to admit that the delay in my case was unusual . When I asked him what , if anything , I could do about it , he surprised me by referring me to the director of the hall . I could consult this personage on any weekday morning , though not before ten o'clock . The clerk impressed this upon me : that I should not arrive in the hall before ten o'clock . When I went for my interview with the director I saw why . Although it was dark as usual I could see that the hall had only recently contained a great many people . Cigarette butts littered the floor . The big fans were going , drawing from the large room the remnants of stale smoke which drifted about in pale strata underneath the ceiling . I had felt the draft they were making while mounting the stairs . The staircase itself seemed still to be echoing the heavy footfalls of many men . I stopped by the counter . No one was behind it , but in the rear wall of the office I noticed , for the first time , a door which had been left partially open . Past it I could see part part of a desk , a flag in a corner , a rug on the floor . The director's office . I rapped my knuckles on the counter . The director came to the door . I was at once disappointed , although just what I had expected him to look like I could not have explained . He was a man in his late forties , with graying hair , of medium height ; ; he looked dapper in a lightweight summer suit , brown silk tie and green-tinted soft collar . He wore perforated , white-topped shoes ; ; they somehow made me expect to see him launch into a vaudeville tapdance routine any moment . But he came toward me sedately enough , showed me around the counter , offered me a seat inside his office , then walked to a file cabinet and got out my application . I had the impression that he had read my forms , perhaps several times . He did not look at them now . As he lowered himself on the chair behind his desk I wondered what this dapper , slightly ridiculous man could possibly have to do with the workings of the hall . He spoke , in a voice as immaculate as his appearance . Why had I registered ? ? Begging my pardon , he must express his astonishment over seeing a person of my background applying at the hall . He had looked over my forms and was impressed by what he had seen there ; ; indeed , my scholastic qualifications were such that he , a college graduate himself , must envy me them . Was I sure , he asked , that I knew what I was applying for ? ? What sort of men I would come into contact with , at the hall ? ? These questions did not surprise me ; ; I felt certain that the director , like the afternoon clerk , seldom moved beyond the counter , that the hall , to them , was a jungle , a dark and unwelcome place . Though I doubted that he would understand me , I told the director my motives for applying . I had always , I said , hankered after working hard with my hands . This desire , I went on , growing voluble as my conviction was aroused , had mounted at such a rate recently that I now found its realization necessary not only to my physical but also to my spiritual wellbeing . To this effect I had already severed all connections which bound me to my former existence . The flat , hard cap was small , but he thrust it to the back of his head . `` Tie him up '' . `` Hell with it '' . Before they could guess his intention Rankin stepped forward and swung the guard's own gun against the uncovered head , hard . The man went over without sound , falling to the bare floor . Barton said harshly , `` Why did you do that '' ? ? Rankin sneered at him . `` What did you want me to do , kiss him ? ? He dumped me in solitary twice '' . Barton caught the lighter man's shoulder and swung him around . `` Let's get one thing straight , you and me . The only reason we brought you was to get Miller out . If you ever try anything without my orders I'll kill you '' . Fred Rankin looked at him . It seemed to Barton that the green eyes mocked him , the thin-lipped smile held insolence , but he had no time to waste now . `` Come on . Let's move '' . They filed out through the guard-room door , into the paved square . There were three other men within this prison whom Barton would have liked to liberate , but they were in other cell blocks . There was no chance . They moved slowly , toward the main gate , following the wall . There was no moon . They had chosen this night purposely . They reached the guard house without alerting the men on the walls above , and Powers slipped through the door . Two men were on duty inside , playing pinochle , relaxed . They looked up in surprise as Powers came in . `` What are you doing out of the block '' ? ? `` It's Curtiss '' , he said , naming the man Rankin had hit . `` I've got to have help '' . They stared at him . The sergeant in charge climbed to his feet . `` What's wrong with him '' ? ? `` He's having some kind of a fit '' . The sergeant turned to the door . As he passed through it Barton shoved his gun against the man's side . `` One sound and you're dead '' . The sergeant froze . Powers had not followed . Powers was covering the remaining guard . The man half-reached for the cord of the alarm bell . Powers knocked his arm aside . Deliberately , with none of Rankin's viciousness , he laid the barrel of his gun alongside the guard's head . They were free . Even Barton could not quite believe it . It had gone without a hitch . They slid through the wicket in the big gate , ghosted across the dark ground . Five minutes later they reached the horses . Barton was relieved to see that Carl Dill and Emmett Foster had brought extra mounts . He had been worried that with Miller and Rankin added to the escape party they would be short . No one hurried . They walked the horses , heading along the river , Barton and Emmett Foster in the lead , seven men riding quietly through the night . The only thing which would have attracted attention was that two wore the uniform of prison guards , three the striped suits of convicts . Five miles . In a small grove against the river they halted , turning deep into the protection of the trees . Foster had brought extra clothing also . A good man , Emmett . He had been one of the original Night Riders , one who had escaped the trial . It was to him that Barton had sent Carl Dill on Dill's release from the prison . Clyde Miller was crying softly to himself , shedding his striped suit and fumbling into the nondescript butternut pants , the worn brown shirt . Kid Boyd was unusually silent , Rankin watchful , a few paces apart . Barton finished his dressing and extended his hand to Powers . `` I won't even try to thank you '' . The ex-prison guard was embarrassed . He said in a studied voice , `` I didn't do it for you . I did it for the valley . You're the only man the Night Riders will follow . We've been starving and I don't like to starve '' . Barton turned away , his eyes falling upon Rankin beside his horse . `` Good luck '' . The murderer lifted his head . `` Meaning you want me to ride out '' ? ? `` You aren't one of us . There's nothing for you here '' . `` I got no place to go '' . Barton hesitated . He did not trust Rankin , his violent temper , his killer instinct . But ten years in prison had taught him realities . They were in a fight , outweighed in both numbers and money . It was all right to put a bunch of ranchers onto horses , to call them Night Riders , to set out to attack the largest mining combination the country had ever seen if all they wanted was adventure . But if they really hoped to succeed they needed professionals , men who knew how to use a gun against men , who would match the killers on the other side . `` Your choice '' , he said briefly , and turned to Kid Boyd . `` Bury those uniforms so they won't be found '' . Then Barton touched Carl Dill's arm and moved off , up the river bank . He wanted a careful , uninterrupted report from Dill on the conditions in the valley . They squatted on their heels in the deep mud and Dill found a cigar in his breast pocket , passing it over silently . He too knew the agony of going for weeks , sometimes months without the solace of tobacco . Mitchell Barton drew in the fragrance deeply , letting the smoke lie warm and soothing in his throat for a moment before he exhaled . Through the gloom he could not see the man beside him clearly but he knew him thoroughly . For his first five years in prison , they had shared a cell . Carl Dill was neither a rancher nor a valley man . He had been the auditor for the mining syndicate , and he had stolen fifty thousand dollars of the syndicate's money . He had done time for the theft . The one thing they had in common was their hatred . Both hated Donald Kruger . It had drawn them together , and since his release from prison Dill had worked tirelessly to effect this night's escape . He said now , `` I've got the perfect headquarters set up . The old Haskell mine '' . Mitch Barton knew the place . Twenty years before a group of Easterners had bought out the Haskell claims in the rocky hills south of Grass Valley . They had spent a million dollars , carving in a road , putting up buildings , drilling their haulage tunnel . Then the vein had petered out and the whole project had been abandoned . `` The road's washed badly '' , said Dill , `` but there's a trail you can get over with a horse . A company of cavalry couldn't come in there if two men were guarding that trail '' . Barton nodded . `` How do the valley people feel '' ? ? `` As mad as ever . But Kruger's men keep them off balance , and they don't trust me . I'm an outsider . When they learn you're in the hills though , they'll rally , don't worry about that '' . Barton waited for a long moment , then asked the question which lay always uppermost in his mind . `` My boy . Did you find him '' ? ? Dill was silent as if he hated to answer , and Barton had a cold , sick feeling of apprehension . `` He's in Morgan's Ferry '' . Barton half-straightened in surprise . `` What's he doing there '' ? ? Again Dill hesitated . `` Dealing faro '' . `` Dealing faro ? ? How come '' ? ? `` Your sister-in-law has the faro bank in Cap Ayres' saloon '' . Barton cursed under his breath . After another long pause he asked , `` How many people know who they are '' ? ? `` Everyone . Your cousin Finley saw to that . He's quite a rat , you know . He sold out to Kruger's men . He's informed them of everything you've ever written him . He wants your ranch '' . Barton stood up . He said tensely , `` All right . Let's go get the boy '' . Dill had come up also . `` I was afraid of this . I almost didn't tell you '' . `` If you hadn't I'd have killed you '' . Dill's voice tightened . `` But you can't ride into the Ferry . That's what they'll expect you to do . They'll be there waiting for you . I understand how you feel about the child . '' `` The hell you do '' . Barton's voice was rougher than Dill had ever heard it . `` I never saw him . My wife died in childbirth after I was sent away . `` I can't leave him there . Donald Kruger would like nothing better than to hold him as hostage , and I wouldn't entrust a snake to his tender care . I've got to get the boy . Let's ride '' . Chapter two Barton's men cut the telegraph wires in half a dozen places , carrying away whole sections to make repairs more difficult . It was over an hour before their escape was discovered , but still the news that Barton was free flashed across the central portion of the state . It reached Donald Kruger in his massive home in Burlingame . It reached the mines at North San Juan and Bloomfield . It brought men out of bed and sent them into hurried conferences . For everyone involved knew that the whole valley was a powder keg , and Mitchell Barton the fuse which could send it into explosive violence . Creighton Hague sat in his office above the Ione pit . The office was of logs , four rooms , each heated by an iron stove . The building was dwarfed by the scene outside . There a dozen giant monitors played their seventy-five-foot jets of water against the huge seam of tertiary gravel which was the mountainside . The gravel was the bed of an ancient river , buckled in some prehistoric upheaval of earth . It was partially cemented by ages and pressure , yet it crumpled before the onslaught of the powerful streams , the force of a thousand fire hoses , and with the gold it held washed down through the long sluices . A million dollars' of gold a month . A million tons of rock and soil and brush . The monitors ran twenty-four hours each day . Their roar , like the swelling volume of a hundred tornadoes could be heard for miles . Hague , like all who worked near the pits , was partly deafened from the constant assault against his eardrums . He was a big man , wearing a neat flannel shirt against the cold foothill air . Fat showed in loose rolls beneath the shirt . Ten years older than Mitch Barton , he had clawed his way up from mucker in the pits to manager of the operation . He was proud of his accomplishments , proud of his job , proud that Donald Kruger and his associates trusted him . He lived and breathed for the mining company . No man could have reached his spot nor held it without being ruthless , and Hague had made a virtue of ruthlessness all of his life . There came a ghost of noise at the office door and Hague swung to see Kodyke in the entrance from the outer room . Hague had never accustomed himself to Kodyke . The man was tall , thin , with a narrow face and a too-large nose . The eyes always held Hague , eyes of a dead man , lidless as a lizard's , with the fixed intensity of a cobra . Even Hague was repelled by the machinelike deadliness that was Kodyke . He knew nothing about the man's history . Kodyke had appeared at the mine one day bearing a letter from Kruger . Kodyke was to head the dread company police . He ran the change rooms . He threw out the hi-graders . He supervised the cleanups and handled the shipments of raw gold which each week went out to San Francisco . Hague squeezed down his uneasy dislike . He pulled open the top drawer of his desk and drew out a tintype . `` This is Mitchell Barton . He broke out of Folsom last night . Apparently he bribed one of the guards . We want him back there or we want him dead '' . Kodyke took the picture in a lean hand , studying it thoughtfully . `` Dangerous '' ? ? `` Dangerous , yes . You know how the ranchers in the valley are . They blame us for all their troubles . Ten years ago they blew up some of our ditches . It cost us a hundred thousand dollars and thirty days lost time to fix them . We don't want Barton's Night Riders loose again '' . The gunman nodded , slipping the picture into his breast pocket , saying nothing . Normally Hague wasted no words , but now he found himself unable to stop their flow although he knew Kodyke was aware of all he said . If she sensed any unusual preoccupation on the part of her mother , she did not comment upon it . After they had finished eating , Melissa took Sprite the kitten under her arm -- `` so that Auntie Grace can teach it about the whistle '' -- and climbed into the station wagon beside her mother . She had offered to walk , but Pamela knew she would not feel comfortable about her child until she had personally confided her to the care of the little pink woman who chose to be called `` Auntie '' . When they reached their neighbor's house , Pamela said a few polite words to Grace and kissed Melissa lightly on the forehead , the impulse prompted by a stray thought -- of the type to which she was frequently subject these days -- that they might never see one another again . Then she turned the station wagon around and headed it back down the hill , with the village as her ostensible destination . As she drove , she thought about her plan . It was really quite simple . So simple , in fact , that it might even work -- although Pamela , now , in her new frame of mind , was careful not to pretend too much assurance . That mistake , she thought , had cost her dearly these past few days , and she wanted to avoid falling into any more of the traps that the mountain might set for her . She must be cautious so as not to alert the scheming forest . When the station wagon drew abreast of the dusty dirt road that led up to the porch of the Culver house , Pamela turned the wheel , guiding the car to its familiar parking spot close to the house , and stopped . All of her movements were careful and methodical , partaking of the stealth of a criminal who has plotted his felony for months in advance and knows exactly which step to take next in the course of the final execution of his crime . She locked the ignition , removed the keys , stepped out of the car and went into the house . Here , she dropped the keys on a small table beside the door and went upstairs to her bedroom . On her bureau lay a small , brass ornament of simple design and faded engraving -- an object which , Pamela believed now , had been the property of her great-grandfather , Major Hiram Munroe Culver . He had belonged to this land and , perhaps , had desecrated it -- and this was the only material symbol that remained of him . If she , Pamela , were being held responsible for his crimes , then hers must be the final act of expiation . She would return this symbol to the mountain , as one pours seed back into the soil every Spring or as ancient fertility cults demand annual human sacrifice . Slowly and thoughtfully , she slipped the ornament into the pocket of her slacks , moved down the stairs and out of the house . There was only one place where the mountain might receive her -- that unnamed , unnameable pool harbored in its secret bosom . Atonement , if atonement were possible , could only be made at that sacred , sacrificial basin . It was there that she would have to enact her renunciation , beg forgiveness . Perhaps it was insane , Pamela thought . Perhaps it was all a vividly conceived dream . But she was caught in it , and she faced the terrible possibility that , if it were a dream , it was one from which she might never awaken . Facing the forest now , she who had not dared to enter it before , walked between two trees at random and headed in what she believed was the direction of the pool . She remembered little of her previous journey there with Grace , and she could but hope that her dedication to her mission would enable her to accomplish it . The forest was open and freely welcoming , extending an enchanted hand . The ground was covered with soft pine needles and the slope was gentle . Birds chirped and chattered in the trees and the sun , all dewy-eyed and soft , caressed her shoulders warmly from time to time . It was not , thought Pamela , such an evil place after all . No wonder Melissa responded so completely to its beckoning . Perhaps she had no reason to fear these trees that whispered their secrets above her head as she passed . Was it not possible , after all , that the forest was in league with her and her child that its sympathy lay with the Culvers that she had erred in failing to understand this ? ? Pamela felt calm and peaceful as she walked along . The slight flutter that had disturbed the motion of her heart when she entered the forest was gone now , and even the dim groves of trees through which she occasionally passed did not reawaken her fear . She regarded them as signs that she was nearing the glen she sought , and she was glad to at last be doing something positive in her unenunciated , undefined struggle with the mountain and its darkling inhabitants . Having persisted too long in deliberate ignorance and denial of the forces that threatened her , Pamela was relieved now to admit their potency and to be taking definite steps toward grappling with them . A few days ago , she would have thought such an expedition as this utterly ridiculous ; ; today , on the contrary , it seemed utterly reasonable . She did not pause to consider what she would do if her plan should fail ; ; she directed all of her mental and physical energy toward achieving this one goal . If , as she walked , her steps fumbled from time to time , she chose to ignore that omen . If the slope grew steeper and the groves more dim , she tried not to heed . Success depended upon maintaining her equanimity ; ; she must be poised and proud and unafraid in order to prove to the mountain that she was in earnest . The forest took on an impersonal aspect . It did not care what sort of person prowled its woods , plucked at its bark or stripped the berries from its bushes . Unconcerned , indifferent , unmotivated , the forest was simply there -- fighting man's depredations with more abundant growth and man's follies with its own musical evening laughter . Red man or white man , pacifist or killer , the forest would accept them all -- knowing that it could thrive equally well on slaughter and beneficence ; ; knowing that its ageless mass would always dwarf the short span of time allotted to any man . Pamela shook her head . She must not think about time . That was another one of those traps . In her grim pursuit of tranquillity , Pamela focused her thoughts on her husband . If , when this was all over , she found the words to tell him about it , she wondered if he would ever understand . How could he comprehend her need when he himself was innocent ? ? Indian ghosts would not impinge upon his nights , nor would his days be haunted by the dimly-outlined , ill-conceived figure of her benighted ancestor . His bright , daylight mind would whistle away such images ; ; they would not dare to face his scoffing . Pamela was glad Jim was nowhere near . His presence would have interfered with her duty . The mountainside grew steeper and she slipped once or twice on the smooth pine needles . The trees huddled more closely together , their limbs and leaves intertwined in a coarse curtain against the sun . Bushes and vines abetted the rocks in forming thorny detours for the struggling stranger , and without the direct light of the sun to act as compass , Pamela could no longer be positive of her direction . Nevertheless , she continued to move upward . She was sure she would reach the pool by climbing , and she clung to that belief despite the increasing number of obstacles . The forest had become an alien world where she strove , alone , unprotected , unguided , to deal with whatever hindrances were offered . It was a bold , dark castle of pine boughs that stood like a medieval fortress , eclipsing the sun and human time . At one and the same time , she was within it but still searching for the drawbridge that would give her entry . Silence came into the forest -- a solid being that clapped its hand over the murmuring mouths of the birds and the whispered comfort of the trees . Silence walked at Pamela's side , its presence numbingly close , yet too far for her to hear . Silence stood in front of her , waiting , and in back of her , blocking her retreat . She stumbled over the root of a tree that protruded maliciously above the earth . In spite of her attempt to preserve her balance , she fell , bruising her arm on a naked stone . For a moment , she could not catch her breath and then , her breath returning in short , frightened spasms , she lifted herself to her feet laboriously . She started to brush the dirt and bits of leaves off her clothes . Her arm bled slightly , and the offended skin cried out in pain . She looked around . She was bewildered . She seemed to have come such a long distance -- too far for her destination which had wilfully been swallowed up in the greedy gloom of the trees . She stood quite still , trying to focus upon a direction in which to turn , a path to follow , a clue to guide her . She was standing in a thick grove . The trees were crowded so closely together that their branches overlapped , virtually shutting out the sun completely . The earth smelled moist and pungent as it might in a cave deprived of the cleansing effect of the sun's rays . She had the feeling that , under the mouldering leaves , there would be the bodies of dead animals , quietly decaying and giving their soil back to the mountain . The thought made Pamela shudder . A terrible chill swept through the grove . Not a breeze exactly , but a pocket of icy air that settled with a loathsome familiarity upon the deep confines of the grove , catching Pamela in a leering embrace . There was a peculiar density about it , a thick substance that could be sensed but never identified , never actually perceived . Where before had she felt or dreamt or imagined such a scene ? ? She already knew this unwholesome , chilling atmosphere that was somehow grotesquely alive . It enclosed her clammy hands and twined around her ankles . It crept into the open neck of her blouse and slid down her body , seeping into her flesh through all the quivering pores of her skin . It crawled across her breasts , suffocating the life in her nipples . It circled her thighs , exploring with its icy tentacles . It entered her body with the ghastly intimacy of an incubus , and its particles , spreading , creeping , crawling , joined themselves into steel bands that constricted her knees so tightly that they ached ; ; stifled her lungs so that her breath came in harsh gasps ; ; clutched her throat and sucked up the moisture in her mouth so that her tongue was dry and hard and stuck to the roof of her mouth and her teeth were clenched together in the rigid fixture of her jaws . She had to get away from here before this demoniac possession swallowed up the liquid of her eyes and sank into the fibers of her brain , depriving her of reason and sight . But she did not know which way to go . The shadows of the trees engulfed her , foreclosing every possible exit from the grove . She had been snared here by a vile sensuality that writhed around her throat in ever-tightening circles . She could not scream , for even if a sound could take shape within her parched mouth , who would hear , who would listen ? ? Does the mountain listen ? ? Pamela groped blindly . She had to escape . She had to move in some direction -- any direction that would take her away from this evil place . She thrust forward through the shadows and the trees that resisted her and tried to fling her back . Her own body protested , aching painfully where the blood in her veins had congealed , where cold demon wisps still clung and caressed . Every movement she made seemed unnecessarily noisy . Twigs cracked loudly under her feet ; ; bushes swished and scratched at her slacks ; ; tree branches snapped as she pushed them ruthlessly away from her . Miraculously , she found exactly the right statement . She began it deliberately , so that none of her words would be lost on him . `` I want to tell you something Thomas DeMontez Lord . I'm well aware that you've got a pedigree as long as my leg , and that I don't amount to anything . But '' -- `` But it don't matter a-tall '' , Lord supplied fondly . `` To me you'll always be the girl o' my dreams , an' the sweetest flower that grows '' . Beaming idiotically , he pooched out his lips and attempted to kiss her . She yanked away from him furiously . `` You shut up ! ! Shu-tt up-pp ! ! I've got something to say to you , and by God you're going to listen . Do you hear me ? ? You're going to listen '' ! ! Lord nodded agreeably . He said he wanted very much to listen . He knew that anything a brainy little lady like her had to say would be plumb important , as well as pleasin' to the ear , and he didn't want to miss a word of it . So would she mind speaking a little louder ? ? `` I think you stink , Tom Lord ! ! I think you're mean and hateful and stupid , and -- louder '' ? ? Said Joyce . `` Uh-huh . So I can hear you while I'm checkin' the car . Looks like we might be in for a speck of trouble '' . He opened the door and got out . He waited at the car side for a moment , looking down at her expectantly . `` Well ? ? Wasn't you goin' to say somethin' '' ? ? Then , helpfully , as she merely stared at him in weary silence , `` Maybe you could write it down for me , huh ? ? Print it in real big letters , an' I can cipher it out later '' . `` Aah , go on '' , she said . `` Just go the hell on '' . He grinned , nodded , and walked around to the front of the car . Lips pursed mournfully , he stared down at its crazily sagging left side . Then he hunkered down on the heels of his handmade boots , peered into the orderly chaos of axle , shock absorber , and spring . He went prone on his stomach , the better to pursue his examination . After a time , he straightened again , brushing the red Permian dust from his hands , slapping it from his six-dollar levis and his tailored , twenty-five-dollar shirt . He wore no gun -- a strange ommission for a peace officer in this country . Never , he'd once told Joyce , had he encountered any man or situation that called for a gun . And he really feels that way , she thought . That's really all he's got , all he is . Just a big pile of self-confidence in an almost teensy package . If I could make myself feel the same way She studied him hopefully , yearningly ; ; against the limitless background of sky and wasteland it was easy to confirm her analysis . Here in the God-forsaken place , the westerly end of nowhere , Tom Lord looked almost insignificant , almost contemptible . He was handsome , with his coal-black hair and eyes , his fine-chiseled features . But she'd known plenty of handsomer guys , and , conceding his good looks , what was there left ? ? He wasn't a big man ; ; rather on the medium side . Neither was he very powerful of build . He could move very quickly , she knew ( although he seldom found occasion to do so ) , but he was more wiry than truly strong . And his relatively small hands and feet gave him an almost delicate appearance . Just nothing , she told herself . Just so darned sure of himself that he puts the Indian sign on everyone . But , by gosh , I want him and I'm going to have him ! ! He caught her eye , came back around the car with the boot-wearer ; ; teetering , half-mincing walk . Why did these yokels still wear boots , anyway , when most had scarcely sat a horse in years ? ? He slid in at her side , tucked a cigar into his mouth , and politely proffered one to her . `` Oh , cut it out , Tom '' ! ! She snapped . `` Can't you stop that stupid clowning for even a minute '' ? ? `` This ain't your brand , maybe '' , Lord suggested . `` Or maybe you just don't feel like a cigar '' ? ? `` I feel like getting back to town , that's what I feel like ! ! Now , are you going to take me or am I supposed to walk '' ? ? `` Might get there faster walkin' '' , Lord drawled , `` seein' as how I got a busted front spring . On the other hand , howsomever , maybe you wouldn't either . I figger it's probl'y a sixty-five-mile walk , and I c'n maybe get this spring patched up in a couple of hours '' . `` How -- with what ? ? There's nothing out here but rattlesnakes '' . `` Now , ain't it the truth '' ? ? Lord laughed with secret amusement . `` Not a danged thing but rattlesnakes , so I reckon I'll get the boss rattler to help me '' . `` Tom ! ! For God's sake '' ! ! `` Looky '' . He pointed , cutting her off . `` See that wildcat '' ? ? She saw it then , the distant derrick of the wildcat -- a test well in unexplored country . And even with her limited knowledge of such things , she knew that the car could be repaired there ; ; sufficiently , at least , to get them back into town . A wildcatter had to be prepared for almost any emergency . He had to depend on himself , since he was invariably miles and hours away from others . `` Well , let's get going '' , she said impatiently . `` I '' -- She broke off , frowning . `` What did you mean by that rattlesnake gag ? ? Getting the boss rattlesnake to help you '' ? ? `` Why , I meant what I said '' , Lord declared . `` What else would I mean , anyways '' ? ? She looked at him , lips compressed . Then , with a shrug of pretended indifference , she took a compact from her purse and went through the motions of fixing her make-up . In his mood , it was the best way to handle him ; ; that is , to show no curiosity whatsoever . Otherwise , she would be baited into a tantrum -- teased and provoked until she lost control of herself , and thus lost still another battle in the maddening struggle of Tom Lord Vs. Joyce Lakewood . The car lurched along at a snail's crawl , the left-front mudguard banging and scraping against the tire , occasionally scraping against the road itself . Lord whistled tunelessly as he fought the steering wheel . He seemed very pleased with himself , as though some intricate scheme was working out exactly as he had planned . Along with this self-satisfaction , however , Joyce sensed a growing tension . It poured out of him like an electric current , a feeling that the muscles and nerves of his fine-drawn body were coiling for action , and that that action would be all that he anticipated . Joyce had seen him like this once before -- more than once , actually , but on one particularly memorable occasion . That was the day that he had practically mopped up the main street of Big Sands with Aaron McBride , field boss for the Highlands Oil & Gas Company . Tom had been laying for Aaron McBride for a long time , just waiting to catch him out of line . McBride gave him his opportunity when he showed up in town with a pistol on his hip . He had a legitimate reason for wearing it . It was payday for Highlands , and he was packing a lot of money back into the oil fields . Moreover , as long as the weapon was carried openly , the sheriff's office had made no previous issue of it . `` So what's this all about '' ? ? He demanded , when Lord confronted him . I'm not the only man in town with a gun , or the only one without a permit '' . It was the wrong thing to say . By failing to do as he was told instantly -- to take out a permit or return the gun to his car -- he had played into Lord's hands . The trouble was that he had virtually had to protest . The deputy had forced him to by his manner of accosting him . So , `` How about it '' ? ? He said . `` Why single me out on this permit deal '' ? ? `` Well , I'll tell you about that '' , Lord told him . `` We aim t' be see-lective , y'know ? ? Don't like to bother no one unless we have to , which I figger we do , in your case . Figger we got to be plumb careful with any of you Highlands big shots '' . McBride reddened . He himself had heard that there was gangster money in the company , but that had nothing to do with him . He was an honest man doing a hard job , and the implication that he was anything else was unbearable . `` Look , Lord '' , he said hoarsely . `` I know you've got a grudge against me , and maybe I can't blame you . You think that Highlands swindled you and I helped 'em do it . But you're all wrong , man ! ! I'm no lawyer . I just do what I'm told , and '' -- `` uh-huh . An' that could mean trouble with a fella that's workin' for crooks . So you get rid of that pistol right now , Mis-ter McBride . You do that or take you out a permit right now '' . McBride couldn't do either , of course . Not immediately , as the deputy demanded . Not without a face-saving respite of at least a few minutes . To do so would make his job well-nigh impossible . Oil-field workers were a rough-tough lot . How could he exert authority over them -- make them toe the line , as he had to -- if he knuckled under to this small-town clown ? ? `` I'll get around to it a little later '' , he mumbled desperately . `` Just as soon as I go to the bank , and '' -- `` huh-uh . Now , Mis-ter McBride '' , said Lord , and he laid a firmly restraining hand on the field boss's arm . It was strictly the deputy's game , but McBride had gone too far to throw in . Now , he could only play the last card in what was probably the world's coldest deck . He flung off Lord's hand and attempted to push past him , inadvertently shoving him into a storefront . It was practically the last move that McBride made of his own volition . Lord slugged him in the stomach , so hard that the organ almost pressed against his spine . Then , as he doubled , gasping , vomiting the breakfast he had so lately eaten , Lord straightened him with an uppercut . A rabbit punch redoubled him . And then there was a numbing blow to the heart , and another gut-flattening blow to the stomach But he couldn't keep up with them . No more could he defend himself against them . He seemed to be fighting not one man but a dozen . And he could no longer think of face-saving , of honor , but only of escape . Why , he's going to kill me , he thought wildly . I meant him no harm . I've given willful hurt to no man . I was just doing my job , just following orders , and for that he's going to kill me . Beat me to death in front of a hundred people . Somehow more terrible than the certainty that he was about to die was the knowledge that Lord would probably not suffer for it : the murder would go unpunished . He , McBride , would be cited as in the wrong , and he , Lord , would go scot-free , an officer who had only done his duty , though perhaps too energetically . McBride staggered into the street , flopped sprawling in the stinging dust . Fear-maddened , fleeing the lengthening shadow of death , he scrambled to his feet again . He couldn't see ; ; he was long past the point of coherent thinking . Dimly , he heard laughter , hoots of derision , but he could not read the racket properly . He could not grasp that Lord had withdrawn from the fight minutes ago , and that his leaden arms were flailing at nothing but the air . He hated them too much to understand -- the people of this isolated law-unto-itself world that was Lord's world . This , he was sure , was the way they would act ; ; laughing at a dying man , laughing as a man was beaten to death . And nothing would be done about it . Nothing unless Donna ! ! Donna , his young wife , the girl who was both daughter and wife to him . Donna was like he was . She lived by the rules , never compromising , never blinded or diverted by circumstance . And Donna would -- When he regained consciousness he was in Lord's house , in the office of Doctor Lord , the deputy's deceased father . The Brannon outfit -- known as the Slash-B because of its brand -- reached Hondo Creek before sundown . The herd was watered and then thrown onto a broad grass flat which was to be the first night's bedground . Two of the new hands , a Mexican named Jose Amado and a kid known only as Laredo , were picked for the first trick of riding night herd . The rest of the crew offsaddled their mounts and turned them into the remuda . They got tin cups of coffee from the big pot on the coosie's fire , rolled and lighted brown-paper cigarettes , lounged about . There was some idle talk , a listless discussion of this or that small happening during the day's drive . But they deliberately avoided the one subject that had them all curious : the failure of the boss's wife and son to join the outfit . It especially bothered the older hands . The cook , Mateo Garcia , had arrived there long before the herd . He'd started a fire and put coffee on , and now was busy at the work board of his chuck wagon . He was readying a batch of sourdough biscuits for the Dutch oven . Supper would be ready within the hour . The Maguire family was setting up a separate camp nearby . Billie had unhitched the mules from both Tom Brannon's and his father's wagon . Hank had gathered wood for a cookfire , and his wife was busy at it now . Conchita kept an eye on the twins and little Elena , trying to keep them from falling into the creek by which they persisted in playing . Conchita nagged at the younger children , attempting without success to keep her thoughts off Tom Brannon . Tom Brannon had caught up with the outfit shortly after the Maguires joined it , which had been at midday . He'd come alone , without his wife and child . He'd been in an angry mood : Conchita had thought his face almost ugly with the anger in him . She wondered what had taken place in town , between him and his wife . She wished that she could talk to her mother about it . Not that her mother knew what had happened , but they could speculate upon it . But her mother would rebuke her if she mentioned it , and say that it was none of her concern . `` Pat , get out of that creek ! ! You too , Sean ! ! Elena , you'll get mud all over your dress '' ! ! Even as she called to the children , Conchita let her gaze seek Tom Brannon . Tomas , she called him -- as the Mexican hands did . He was in earnest conversation with her father and the old vaquero , Luis Hernandez . Whatever they are talking about ? ? Conchita wondered . It bothered her that she probably would never know . Certainly , she wouldn't dare ask her father afterward . He would tell her not to pry into grownups' affairs -- as though she were a little kid like Elena ! ! At the moment , the three men were not saying much of anything . They were sitting on their heels , rider-fashion , over by the still empty calf wagon . Brannon was hunkered down with his broad back to the left rear wheel , with the other two facing him . He held a cigarette in his right hand . It was burning away , forgotten . His face was clouded with unhappiness . He'd told Hank Maguire and Luis Hernandez about his wife's refusal to come with him and about what he now intended to do . They were considering it gravely , neither seeming to like what he planned . Finally Hernandez said , `` I could offer you advice , Tomas , but you wouldn't heed it '' . `` Let's hear it , anyway '' . `` Wait a little while . Let Senora Brannon live in her father's house for a time . Give her time to miss you . Maybe she will then come to you . After all , you want the senora as much as you want the boy . You need her even more than you need him '' . `` She won't change her mind '' , Brannon said . `` John Clayton will see to that '' . `` But after a time away from you . '' `` A year , Luis ? ? Five ? ? Ten ? ? How long should I wait '' ? ? `` Maybe in a year , Tomas . '' `` In a year she'll like living in Clayton's house too much to come back to me '' , Brannon said flatly . `` And the boy will be too much under his influence by then . I've got to take Danny away from Clayton before I lose him altogether . Hell , in a year or five or ten , the boy will have forgotten me -- his own father '' ! ! `` But to take him and leave his mother behind is not good '' . `` In my place , you'd follow such advice as you give me '' ? ? Hernandez looked suddenly uncertain . `` That I can't answer , for I can't imagine something like this happening to me . Maybe I should withdraw my advice -- no '' ? ? Brannon looked at Hank Maguire . `` And you ? ? What would you do in my place '' ? ? Hank shook his head . `` I don't know , Tom . Like Luis , I can't see something like this happening to me . With Maria and me , there's never any problem . Where I go , she goes -- and the kids with us . You're going to need your woman . And the boy will need his mother . If you take the one , you'd better take both '' . Brannon shook his head . `` I won't force Beth to come against her will . But I'm going to have my son '' . They were silent for a little while , each looking glum . Finally Luis Hernandez said , `` What must be , must be . I am with you , of course , Tomas '' . And Hank Maguire added , `` So am I , Tom '' . `` All right '' , Brannon said , rising . `` We'll ride out as soon as we've had chuck '' . Brannon timed it so that they rode in an hour after nightfall . They had for cover both darkness and a summer storm . During much of the fifteen-mile ride they had watched a lurid display of lightning in the sky to the east . Later , they'd heard the rumble of thunder and then , just outside Rockfork , they ran into rain . Those who had slickers donned them . The others put on old coats or ducking jackets , whichever they carried behind their saddle cantles . There were seven of them , enough for a show of strength -- to run a bluff . It was to be nothing more than that . There was to be no gunplay . If the bluff failed and they ran into trouble , Brannon had told the others , they would withdraw -- and he would come after his son another time . He didn't want to put himself outside the law . With him were Hank Maguire , Luis Hernandez , and Luis's son Pedro . The Ramirez brothers were also along . The seventh man was Red Hogan , a wiry little puncher with a wild streak and a liking for hell-raising . They were all good men . It was dark early , because of the storm . Also because of the storm , the streets of Rockfork were deserted . Lighted windows glowed jewel-bright through the downpour . They reined in before the town marshal's office , a box-sized building on Main Street . A lamp burned inside , but Brannon , peering through the window , saw that the office was empty . He'd hoped to catch Jesse Macklin there . `` Probably just stepped out '' , he said . `` Maybe to have supper . Red , come along . The rest of you wait here '' . With Red Hogan , he rode to the Welcome Cafe . Hogan got down from the saddle and had a look inside . `` Not there '' , he said , getting back onto his horse . `` Maybe he's at the hotel '' . They rode to the Rockfork House , a little farther along the opposite side of the street . They reined in there , Brannon remaining in the saddle while Hogan went to look for Jesse Macklin in the hotel dining room . Brannon had no slicker . He'd put on his old brown corduroy coat and it was already soaked . But he felt no physical discomfort . He was only vaguely aware of the sluicing rain . He hardly noticed the blue-green flashes of lightning and the hard claps of thunder . Hogan reappeared , stopped on the hotel porch , lifted a hand in signal . Brannon dismounted and climbed the steps . `` He's finished eating '' , Hogan said . `` Sitting with a cup of coffee now . It shouldn't be long '' . It seemed long , at least to Tom Brannon . He and Hogan waited by the door , one to either side . Macklin was the third man to come out , and he came unhurriedly . He was puffing on a cigar , and he was turning up his coat collar against the rain . It was not until he moved across the porch that he became aware of them , and then it was too late . They closed in fast , kept him from reaching inside his coat for his gun . `` Just come along '' , Brannon told him . `` Don't start anything you can't finish '' . `` Now , listen '' -- Macklin began . `` We'll talk over at your office '' . `` Brannon , I warn you '' ! ! `` Let's go , Marshal '' , Brannon said , and took him by the arm . Hogan gripped the lawman's other arm . They escorted him down from the porch and through the rain to his office . The other five Slash-B men followed them inside , crowding the small room . His face was stiff with anger when they let go of his arms . He looked at each of them in turn , Brannon last of all . `` I'll remember you '' , he said . `` Every last one of you . As for you , Brannon '' -- `` Put your gun on the desk , Marshal '' . `` Now , hold on , damn it ; ; I won't '' -- Red Hogan's patience ran out . He lifted the skirt of Macklin's coat , took his gun from its holster , tossed it onto the desk . `` Too much fooling around '' , he said . `` Don't press your luck , badge-toter '' . Brannon said , `` Now the key to the lockup , Marshal '' . `` Key '' ? ? Macklin said . `` What for '' ? ? `` Can't you guess '' ? ? Brannon said . `` We're putting you where you won't come to harm . Come on -- the key . Get it out '' ! ! `` Damned if I will . Brannon , you've assaulted a law officer and '' -- They moved in on him , crowded him from all sides . No man laid a hand on him , but the threat of violence was there . His face took on a sudden pallor , became beaded with sweat , and he seemed to have trouble with his breathing . He held out a moment longer , then his nerve gave under the pressure . He swore , and said , `` All right . It's here in my pocket '' . `` Get it out '' , Brannon ordered . Then , as Macklin obeyed : `` Now let's go out back '' . Resignedly , Macklin turned to the back door . They followed him into the rain and across to the squat stone building fifty feet to the rear . The door of the lockup was of oak planks and banded with strap iron . It was secured by an oversized padlock . Macklin balked again , not wanting to unlock and open the door . They crowded him in that threatening way once more , forced him to give in . Once the door was open , they crowded him inside the dark building . He was uttering threats in a low but savage voice when they closed and padlocked the door . They returned to the street , mounted their horses , rode through the rain to the big house on Houston Street . Its windows glowed with lamplight . Deputy Marshal Luke Harper still stood guard on the veranda , a forlorn , scarecrowish figure in the murky dark . He came to the edge of the veranda , peered down at them with his hand on his gun . `` Don't try it '' , Brannon told him , dismounting and starting up the steps with his men following . `` Don't get yourself killed for something that doesn't concern you '' . He strode past the now frightened man , entered the house . Miguel and Arturo Ramirez remained on the veranda to keep Harper from interfering . The others followed Brannon inside . They trailed him across the wide hallway to the parlor , four roughly garbed and tough-looking men who probably had never before ventured into such a house . They brought to it all the odors that clung to men like themselves , that of their own sweat , of campfire smoke , of horses and cattle . They tracked mud on the oaken floor , on the carpet . Their presence fouled the elegance of that room . And their arrival caught John Clayton and Charles Ansley off guard . The author of the anonymous notes seemed to be all-knowing . For men who had left cattle alone after getting their first notices had received no second . But the day of the deadline came and passed , and the men who had scoffed at the warnings laughed with satisfaction . For , with a single exception , nothing had happened to them . The exception was an Iron Mountain settler named William Lewis . After walking out to his corral that morning , he'd been amazed to see the dust puff up in front of his feet . A split second later , the distant crack of a rifle had sounded . He'd mounted up immediately and raced with a revolver ready toward the spot from which he'd estimated the shot had come . But he had found all of the thickets and points of cover deserted . There had been no sign of a rifleman and no track or trace to show that anyone had been near . Lewis was a man who had made a full-time job of cow stealing . He hadn't even pretended to be farming his spread . His land had never been plowed . He had done his rustling openly and boasted about it . He had received both first and second anonymous notices , and each time he had accused his neighbors of writing them . He had cursed at them and threatened them . He was a man , those neighbors testified later , who didn't have a friend in the world . William Lewis made the rounds of all who lived near him again , that August morning after a bullet landed at his feet , and once more he accused and threatened everyone . `` I'll be ready next time '' ! ! He raged . `` I'll be shootin' right back '' . He had his chance the very next morning , for exactly the same thing happened again . This time Lewis had his own rifle in his hands , and he threw some answering fire back at the mysterious far-off shot , then spent most of the day searching out the area . He found nothing , but he still refused to give up and move out . `` Just let me meet up with that damned bushwhackin' coward face-to-face '' ! ! He exploded . `` That's all I ask '' ! ! He never got that chance . For the unseen , ghostlike rifleman aimed a little higher the third time . A bullet smashed directly into the center of William Lewis' chest . He slumped against a log fence rail , then tried to lift himself . Two more shots followed in quick succession , dropping him limp and huddled on the ground . An inquest was held , and after a good deal of testimony about the anonymous notes , the county coroner estimated that the shooting had been done from a distance of 300 yards . Rumors of the offer Tom Horn had made at the Stockgrowers' Association meeting had leaked out by then , and as a grand jury investigation of the murder got underway , the prosecuting attorney , a Colonel Baird , ordered that the tall stock detective be summoned for questioning . It took some time to locate Horn . He was finally found in the Bates Hole region of Natrona County , two counties away . Prosecutor Baird immediately assumed he was hiding out there after the shooting and began preparing an indictment . But that indictment was never made . For Tom Horn , it turned out , had a number of rancher and cowboy witnesses ready and willing to swear with straight faces that he had been in Bates Hole the day of the killing . The former scout's alibi couldn't be shaken . The authorities had to release him . He immediately rode on to Cheyenne , threw a ten-day drinking spree and dropped some very strong hints among friends . `` Dead center at three hundred yards , that coroner said '' ! ! He'd grin . `` Three shots in that fella 'fore he hit the ground ! ! You reckon there's two men in this state can shoot like that '' ? ? Publicly , he denied everything . Privately , he created and magnified an image of himself as a hired assassin . For a blood-chilling ring of terror to the very sound of his name was the tool he needed for the job he'd promised to do . Tom Horn was soon back at work , giving his secret employers their money's worth . A good many beef-hungry settlers were accepting the death of William Lewis as proof that the warning notes were not idle threats . The company herds were being raided less often , and cabins and soddies all over the range were standing deserted . But there were other homesteaders who passed the Lewis murder off as a personal grudge killing , the work of one of his neighbors . The rustling problem was by no means solved . Even in the very area where the shooting had been done , cattle were still disappearing . For less than a dozen miles from the unplowed land of the dead man lived another settler who had ignored the warnings that his existence might be foreclosed on -- a blatant and defiant rustler named Fred Powell . `` Fred was mighty crude about the way he took in cattle '' his own hired man , Andy Ross , mentioned later . `` Everyone knew it , but he sort of acted like he didn't care who knew it -- even after them notes came , even after he'd heard about Lewis , even after he'd been shot at a couple o' times hisself '' ! ! On the morning of September 10 , 1895 , Powell and Ross rose at dawn and began their day's work . Haying time was close at hand , and they needed some strong branches to repair a hay rack . Harnessing a team to a buckboard , they drove out to a willow-lined creek about a half-mile off , then climbed down and began chopping . Andy Ross had just started swinging an ax at his second willow when the distant blast of a rifle sounded . He looked around in surprise , then noticed that Fred Powell was clutching his chest . The hired man ran over to help his boss . `` My God , I'm shot '' ! ! Powell gasped . And he collapsed and died instantly . Ross had no intention of searching for the assassin . He heaved the dead man onto the buckboard , yelled and lashed at the team and got out of there fast . But he brought back the sheriff and several deputies , and to the lawmen the entire affair seemed a repetition of the Lewis killing . A detailed scouring of the entire area revealed nothing beyond a ledge of rocks that might have been the rifleman's hiding place . There were no tracks of either hoofs or boots . Not even an empty cartridge case could be found . Once again , Tom Horn was the first and most likely suspect , and he was brought in for questioning immediately . Once again , he shook his head , kept his face expressionless and his voice very calm , and had a strongly supported alibi ready . Later , riding in for some lusty enjoyment of the liquor and professional ladies of Cheyenne , he laid claim to the killing with the vague insinuations he made . `` Exterminatin' cow thieves is just a business proposition with me '' , he'd blandly announce . `` And I sort o' got a corner on the market '' . `` Tom '' , a friend asked him once , `` how come you bushwhacked them rustlers ? ? They wouldn't o' stood no chance with you in a plain , straight-out shoot-down '' . He had lots of friends , then as always . Even as he became widely known as a professional killer , nearly every cowboy and rancher in Wyoming seemed proud to call him a friend . No man's name brought more cheers when it was announced in a rodeo . `` Well '' , he explained , `` s'posin' you was a nester swingin' the long rope ? ? Which would you be most scairt of -- a dry-gulchin' or a shoot-down '' ? ? `` Yeah , I can see that '' , the friend was forced to agree . `` But well , it just don't seem sportin' somehow '' ! ! `` Sportin' '' ! ! The tall sunburnt rustler-hunter stared in amazement . `` Sportin' '' ! ! He echoed again in soft wonder . `` I seen a lot o' things in my time . I found a trooper once the Apache had spread-eagled on an ant hill , and another time we ran across some teamsters they'd caught , tied upside down on their own wagon wheels over little fires until their brains was exploded right out o' their skulls . I heard o' Texas cattlemen wrappin' a cow thief up in green hides and lettin' the sun shrink 'em and squeeze him to death . But there's one thing I never seen or heard of , one thing I just don't think there is , and that's a sportin' way o' killin' a man '' ! ! After the first two murders , the warning notes were rarely ignored . The lesson had been learned . The examples were plain . When Fred Powell's brother-in-law , Charlie Keane , moved into the dead man's home , the anonymous letter writer took no chances on Charlie taking up where Fred had left off and wasted no time on a first notice : If you don't leave this country within 3 days , your life will be taken the same as Powell's was . This was the message found tacked to the cabin door . Keane left , within three days . All through Albany and Laramie counties , other men were doing the same . Houses of settlers who'd treated the company herds as a natural resource , free for the taking , were sitting empty , with weeds growing high in their yards . The small half-heartedly tended fields of men who'd spent more time rustling cattle than farming were lying fallow . No cow thief could count on a jury of his sympathetic peers to free him any longer . Jury , judge and executioner were riding the range in the form of a single unknown figure that could materialize anywhere , at any time , to dispense an ancient brand of justice the men of the new West had believed long outdated . For three straight years , Tom Horn patrolled the southern Wyoming pastures , and how many men he killed after Lewis and Powell ( if he killed Lewis and Powell ) will never be known . It is possible , although highly doubtful , that he killed none at all but merely let his reputation work for him by privately claiming every unsolved murder in the state . It is also possible , but equally doubtful , that he actually shot down the hundreds of men with which his legend credits him . For that legend was growing explosively , Rumor was insisting he received a price of $600 a man . ( The best evidence is that he received a monthly wage of about $125 , very good money in an era when top hands worked for $30 and found . ) Rumor had it he slipped two small rocks under each victim's head as a sort of trademark . ( A detailed search of old coroner's reports fails to substantiate this in the slightest . ) One thing was certain -- his method was effective , so effective that after a time even the warning notices were often unnecessary . The mere fact that the tall figure with the rifle and field glasses had been seen riding that way was enough to frighten three rustling homesteaders out of the Upper Laramie country in a single week . `` My reputation's my stock in trade '' , Tom mentioned more than once . He evidently couldn't foresee that it might be his downfall in the end . He had made himself the personification of the Devil to the homesteaders . But to the cattlemen who had been facing bankruptcy from rustling losses and to the cowboys who had been faced with lay-offs a few years earlier , he was becoming a vastly different type of legendary figure . Such ranchers as Coble and Clay and the Bosler brothers carried him on their books as a cowhand even while he was receiving a much larger salary from parties unknown . He made their spreads his headquarters , and he helped out in their roundups . In the cow camps , Tom Horn was regarded as a hero , as the same kind of champion he was when he entered and invariably won the local rodeos . The hands and their bosses saw him as a lone knight of the range , waging a dedicated crusade against a lawless new society that was threatening a beloved way of life . The wailing , guitar-strumming minstrels of the cattle kingdom made up songs about him . By 1898 , rustling losses had been driven down to the lowest level ever seen in Wyoming . When several minutes had passed and Curt hadn't emerged from the livery stable , Brenner reentered the hotel and faced Summers across the counter . `` I have a little job for you , Charlie . I'm sure you won't mind doing me a small favor '' . Brenner's voice was oily , but Summers wasn't fooled . He moistened his lips uneasily . `` What is it you want me to do , Mr. Brenner '' ? ? Brenner shrugged carelessly . `` It's very simple . I just want you to take a message to Diane Molinari . Tell her to come here to the hotel '' . Vastly relieved , Summers nodded and started toward the door . `` One thing , Summers '' , Brenner said . `` You're not to mention my name . Tell her Curt Adams wants to see her '' . Summers pulled up short , and turned around . `` I don't know , Mr. Brenner '' , he said haltingly , beginning to get an inkling of Brenner's plans . `` It doesn't seem quite right , telling her a thing like that . Couldn't I just '' -- His voice trailed off into silence . Brenner continued to smile , but his eyes were cold . He turned and looked around at the lobby as though seeing things he hadn't before noticed . `` You know , Summers '' , he said thoughtfully . `` Eagle's Nest ought to have a fire company . If someone were to drop a match in here , this place would go up like a haystack '' . He started toward the stairway , then turned to add , `` Tell her to come to Adams's room , that Adams is in trouble . Tell her to hurry '' . `` Yes sir '' . His face pale , Summers headed for the street . Curt's visit to the livery stable had been merely a precaution in case anyone should be watching . He paused only long enough to ascertain that Jess's buckskin was still missing and that his own gray was all right , then climbed through a back window and dropped to the ground outside . The fact that Jess's horse had not been returned to its stall could indicate that Diane's information had been wrong , but Curt didn't interpret it this way . A man like Jess would want to have a ready means of escape in case it was needed . Probably his horse would be close to where he was hiding . From the back of the barn it was a simple matter to reach Black's house without using the street . Curt approached the place cautiously , and watched it several minutes from the protection of a grove of trees . There was a light in Black's front room , but drawn curtains prevented any view of the interior . Curt circled the house and located a barn out back . He could hear horses moving around inside , and nothing else . There was no lock on the door , only an iron hook which he unfastened . He opened the door and went in , pulling it shut behind him . Again he stood in the darkness listening , but there was only the scrape of a shod hoof on a plank floor . He moved ahead carefully , his left hand in front of him , and came to a wooden partition . Horse smell was very strong , and he could hear the crunch of grain being ground between strong jaws . He found a match in his pocket and lit it . There were two horses in the barn , a sway-backed dun and Jess Crouch's buckskin . Curt snuffed out the match . It was certain now that Jess was in the house , but also , presumably , was Stacey Black . Curt wanted to get Jess alone , without interference from anyone , even as spineless a person as the store owner . He studied the problem for a few seconds and thought of a means by which it might be solved . Reaching across the side of the stall , he slapped the buckskin on the rump . The startled animal let out a terrified squeal and thrashed around in the stall . As Curt had hoped , the house door banged open . He slapped the buckskin again and it kicked wildly , its hoofs rattling the side of the stall . Curt moved over beside the door and waited . Presently he heard footsteps crossing the yard , and Jess's smothered curses . The door swung open , and Jess said sourly , `` What the hell's the matter with you ? ? '' The horse continued to snort . Curt doubted that any animal belonging to Jess would find much reassurance in its owner's voice . Jess cursed again , and entered the barn . A match flared , and he reached above his head to light a lantern which hung from a wire loop . As he crossed to the side of the stall , Curt drew his gun and clicked back the hammer . `` Before you try anything '' , he said . `` Remember what happened to Gruller '' . Jess caught his breath in surprise . He started to reach for his gun , but apparently thought better of it . `` That's the stuff '' , Curt said . `` Just hold it that way '' . He reached out to pull the door shut and fasten it with a sliding bolt . `` You and I have a little talking to do , Jess . You won't be needing this '' . He moved up and lifted Jess's pistol out of its holster . `` Damn you , Adams '' -- Jess was beginning to recover from his initial shock . `` We ain't got nothing to talk about . If I don't come back in the house , Breed's going to '' -- `` Your trigger-happy brother isn't in the house . About now he's probably having supper . That long ride the four of you took must've given him a good appetite . Now turn around so I can see your face '' . Jess turned . There was raw fury in his eyes , and the veins of his neck were swollen . `` You're about as dumb as they come , Adams . I don't know what you're up to , but when Brenner '' -- `` You can forget about Brenner , too '' , Curt said . `` It's Ben Arbuckle we're going to talk about '' . `` Arbuckle '' ? ? Jess stiffened . `` I don't know nothin' about him '' . `` No ? ? I suppose you don't know anything about a piece of two-by-four , either ; ; one with blood all over it , Arbuckle's blood '' . Curt's fingers put a little more pressure on the trigger of his gun . `` So help me , Crouch , I'd like to kill you where you stand , but , before I do , I'm going to hear you admit killing him . Now start talking . Who told you to do it ? ? Was it Dutch Brenner '' ? ? Curt was holding Jess's gun in his left hand . He drew back his arm to slash the gunbarrel across Jess's face , but didn't finish the motion . Pistol-whipping an unarmed man might come easy to someone like Jess , but Curt couldn't bring himself to do it . Apparently sensing this , and realizing that it gave him an advantage , Jess became bold . `` Having all the guns makes you a big man , don't it , Adams ? ? If we was both armed , you wouldn't talk so tough '' . `` No '' ? ? Curt reached out and dropped Jess's pistol back into the holster . He retreated a step and holstered his own . `` All right , Crouch ; ; we're on even terms . Now draw '' ! ! Sweat bubbled out on Jess's swarthy face . The fingers of his right hand twisted into a claw , but he didn't reach for the gun . Curt , angry enough to be a little reckless , raised his hands shoulder high . `` Does this make it any easier , coward '' ? ? `` I ain't drawin' against you '' , Jess said thickly . `` I heard how you outdrew Chico . I ain't a gunslinger '' . `` No . You're the kind of bastard who sneaks up on a man from behind and hits him with a club . I just wanted to hear you say so '' . Jess stared at him without answering and let his hands fall to his sides . He had found Curt's weakness , or what to Jess was a weakness , and was smart enough to take advantage of it . Somewhere in the distance , a woman screamed . Curt was too involved in his own problems to pay much attention . He had to make Jess talk , and he had to do it before Stacey Black got curious and came to investigate . Once more he lifted Jess's gun from its holster , only this time he tossed it into the stall with the frightened buckskin . He dropped his own beside it . `` We'll do it another way , then '' , he said harshly . Jess's coarse features twisted in a surprised grin which was smashed out of shape by Curt's fist . With a roar of pain and fury Jess made his attack . Curt managed to duck beneath the man's flailing fist , and drove home a solid left to Jess's mid-section . It was like hitting a sack of salt . Pain shot up Curt's arm clear to the shoulder , but Jess seemed hardly aware that he had been hit . He slammed into the wall , bounced back , and caught Curt with a roundhouse right which sent him spinning . An inch lower and it would have knocked him out . As it was , his vision blurred and for a moment he was unable to move . When his eyes began to focus , he saw Jess charging at him with a pitchfork . Curt twisted to one side , and the tines of the fork bit into the floor . Jess wasted a few seconds trying to yank them loose . It gave Curt time to stagger to his feet . The tines broke off under Jess's twisting , and he swung the handle in an attempt to knock Curt's brains out . His aim was hurried ; ; so the pitchfork whistled over Curt's head . By now Curt was seeing clearly again . He stepped inside Jess's guard and landed two blows to the big man's belly , putting everything he had behind them . They made Jess double over . When his head came down , Curt grabbed him by the hair and catapulted him head first into the wall . The building shook , setting the lantern to swaying , and the buckskin to pitching again . Even Black's old crowbait began to snort , and from the house Black yelled , `` Jess ! ! What's going on out there '' ? ? Jess didn't seem too sure himself . He lurched drunkenly to his feet , lowered his head , and took one step away from the wall . Curt caught him flush on the nose with a blow which started at the floor . Jess had had enough . Blood gushed from his nose , and he backed off as rapidly as he could , stumbling over his own feet in his frantic haste to get away from Curt's fists . Curt was in almost as bad shape , but he wouldn't quit . He backed Jess into a corner , grabbed a handful of the man's shirtfront , and drew back his right fist . `` Tell me about Arbuckle ! ! You killed him , didn't you '' ? ? `` It was Brenner's idea '' , Jess mumbled , dabbing at his nose . `` He found out about you and Arbuckle talking . He wanted to show the town what happened to anyone who tried to start trouble '' . `` You mean anyone who stood up for his rights '' , Curt said . He let go of the shirt , and Jess slumped to the floor . Turning his back , Curt crossed to the stall , reached over to untie the buckskin's halter rope , and waved his hand in the animal's face . The buckskin bolted out of the stall . Curt moved in and picked up his gun . He shook loose straw out of the action , and placed the gun in his holster . Leaving Jess's where it lay , he left the stall . `` Get up , Crouch . We're going someplace '' . Jess painfully got to his feet as someone rattled the door . `` Who's in there '' ? ? Black called fearfully . Curt opened the door , grabbed Black by the shoulder , and pulled him into the barn . `` You're staying right here for a while . This dirty coward just admitted killing Arbuckle . I'm going to let him tell it to somebody else '' . He shoved Black toward the stall , and pointed his pistol at Jess . `` Get out of here . You're coming along peacefully , or I'll put a bullet in your leg '' . Jess stumbled through the door . Curt followed , reaching behind him to shut the door and hook it . Black would have little trouble getting out , but it might delay him a few minutes . `` Where're you takin' me '' ? ? Jess asked worriedly . `` We're going to Marshal Woods's house . Maybe if the marshal hears this himself , it'll make a difference . Somebody in this town must still have some backbone '' . Over his shoulder he could see Max's loose grin and the Burnsides' glowering faces . `` Honey '' , he whispered . `` Soon as we send them on their way and make camp , let's you and me go for a walk down by the Snake -- all by ourselves '' . `` Sally '' , admonished her mother , `` you've got all evening to visit with Dan . His wounds need dressing now '' . Mrs. Jackson's words recalled Dan to his lack of fitness for courting . What a spectacle he was , caked with dirt and sweat and blood , filthy as a pig and naked as an Indian , kissing the finest , the sweetest , the bravest , and absolutely the prettiest girl in this whole wonderful world . He released her reluctantly for her enthusiastic reunion with Old Hap . `` Got a lot to tend to , but I'll get back quick as I can '' , he assured her . Dan could hear Clayton Burnside and Eben Jackson summing up their final reckoning for rental on the oxen . Jackson was doing most of the talking . So long as Sally's pa was coming out best on the haggle , Dan didn't feel the need of putting in his two-bits' worth . Soon as the Burnsides moved on , he'd lead Rex down by the river ; ; there he could shave and scrub himself up for the evening . Damn it , he thought bitterly , picking up his shirt and staring at the fresh bullet hole in the sleeve . If I hadn't got Nate stopped when I did , my duds'd all be shot plumb to hell ! ! He stooped , picked up his ruined hat , and pursed his lips thoughtfully . From the way the wound in his head was itching , Dan knew that it would heal . But his only hat was something else again . `` Nate ! ! Nate '' ! ! He shouted . The Burnsides , now ready to roll , were purposefully deaf to his cry . `` Nate '' ! ! He bellowed to the retreating back directly in front of him . `` I ain't going to fight you no more '' . Nate turned his head , attempting to speak in a soothing voice . `` I know you ain't '' ! ! Dan affirmed , feeling ten feet tall . He moved in close , jerked the handsome , broad-brimmed beaver hat from Nate's head and clamped it on his own . `` Here's a present for you '' , he said , shoving his bullet-riddled hat down over Nate's purpling forehead . `` Me and you's trading hats so's you'll have something permanent to remember me by '' ! ! Sally left her choring to stand beside Dan . Slipping her hand in his , they silently watched the Burnsides make the bend in the road and disappear from sight . Much as they had to look forward to , they didn't begrudge a moment of the time they spent seeing them go . At first Matilda could not believe her own eyes . She had spent too many hours looking ahead , hoping and longing to catch even a glimpse of Dan and finding nothing but emptiness . And now she could see him , looking uncommon handsome , standing there beside Sally Jackson and her folks in front of their trail-worn wagon . Seeing them waiting there at the foot of Emigrant Rock was so overwhelming that , for a good minute after they rounded the bend and started down the grade leading toward them , Matilda could not speak at all . Then , with a glory that almost wiped out the deep , downward sags in her careworn face , Matilda leaned over the wheel and shouted to Hez , who was stumbling along in the heat and the dust on the opposite side of the wagon `` Pa ! ! Pa ! ! I can see Dan . And he's with the Jacksons '' ! ! `` What about Burnsides '' ? ? Hez asked , who still believed they'd have them to lick . `` They ain't even in sight '' ! ! She replied . By then Hez could see for himself , and so could the others . Soon they were all shouting greetings , exchanging smiles , and rejoicing to think that they were all back together again . But even a reunion as joyous as this one did not make a break in the routines of the day . Nor could they stop and find out about all that had happened until they made circle , tended the cattle , tethered the horses , gathered fuel , carried water , and started their cooking fires . Then , and only then , with the Jacksons and Dan as their true guests of honor , did the Harrows take time to catch up on the news . No sooner did they hear of Dan's injury than both Gran and Matilda went into immediate action . The wound in his scalp was examined , pronounced healing , and well doctored with simples , before they dished up the victuals . From then on , in keeping with the traditions they had followed since childhood , the whole group settled down to relish their food . Even Sally , in spite of her gaiety and obvious welcome , followed the old taboo of `` quitting the gab when wearing the nosebag '' . After their supper , the evening turned into a regular `` Hoe-Down '' . Only , they carefully substituted old country folk dances for the Virginia Reels and square dances that were so popular among more worldly trains in the great westward migration . But with Bill O'Connor on the fiddle , and Gran Harrow exuberantly shouting `` Glory Be '' and `` Hallelujah '' above their united chant of the lilting old ballads , they played their quaint folk games with all the fervor and abandon of a real celebration . `` Golly '' , Rod exclaimed to Harmony as he dutifully stood by her side among the ringed spectators , `` don't that fiddle make you wish the Bible didn't say us Baptists can't dance '' ? ? `` Nor Methodists , neither '' , she replied . `` Not that it matters to me , being this far along '' . Rod gave her a warm pat on the shoulder before he replied . `` Come spring , you'll be kicking up your heels and feeling coltish again too , gal '' . At these words of sympathy and understanding , Harmony said generously , `` I don't mind setting here along with Gran while you go out and join in the games '' . Rod shifted his eager eyes from the milling group out in the circle long enough to reply , `` I ain't much of a hand for Dare-Base and Farmer-in-the-Dell , but I'd sure like to get in on the handhold and wrestles '' . He looked down at his big hands and slowly flexed his long fingers . `` Don't reckon there's nobody out there , 'cept maybe Dan , who can outgrip me , Harmony '' . With Rod on his way and Matilda visiting with Mrs. Jackson while they searched out familiar names on the face of the cliff , Harmony settled on the edge of the grub box , to ease the pressure of her swollen body on her bone-weary legs , and worried about all that might have happened to Sally . And she was deeply thankful that she could see her now , out there in the midst of a gay , youthful circle , skipping and singing , `` Farmer in the dell , Farmer in the dell , Heigh-ho the dairy-oh , the farmer in the dell '' . At the sight of Sally's happy face and carefree expression , Harmony's dark , brooding eyes quickly brightened with unshed tears . She was glad , completely and unselfishly glad , to see that things were working out the right way for both Sally and Dan . And she really tried to go a step further and say she hoped they'd be just as right as they now were for her and for Rod . But she couldn't , not yet . Not with the memory of her folks and the lost Conestoga still holding her close . Out in the center of the circle the farmer , who was Dan , wasted no time when they came to the line , `` The farmer choose his wife '' . With a swift swoop of his big arms , he grabbed Sally out of the circle surrounding him , and then kissed her soundly before setting her down so she could stand by his side while they jointly chose the rest of their `` outfit '' . Soon the child , the dog , the cat and even the cheese , all joined them out there in the circle . By now Harmony could see that most of the adults in the train were winded and resting , or else siphoned off from the games by the challenging lure of the great cliff towering above them . No matter how many registry rocks they came to on this journey , each one exerted its own appeal . Even strange names seemed to make them feel closer to some kind of civilization when stumbled across out here in this wilderness . Already a few hardy folk from their own train were zealously chipping away at the register rocks , leaving their own records along with those made by the earlier trains . Soon she saw Rod and Hez moving over to join them . No sooner were they through and the guards posted , than the whole camp turned in for a night of sound sleep . For Matilda , it was the first she had known in many a night . Even the knowledge that she was losing another boy , as a mother always does when a marriage is made , did not prevent her from having the first carefree , dreamless sleep that she had known since they dropped down the canyon and into Bear Valley , way , way back there when they were crossing those other mountains . Next morning , they moved on again . `` My souls' a-gracious '' ! ! Gran Harrow exclaimed , watching their rippling muscles as Rod and Dan swung her up into the load . `` A body would swear I floated right up here on a cloud '' ! ! Rod and Dan released their holds on the arms of her hickory rocker and exchanged embarrassed grins . `` Shucks , Gran '' , they said almost in unison . `` That wasn't nothing at all '' ! ! Leaning forward in her chair , Gran nearsightedly scrutinized Dan's face . `` How's Sally like rubbin' agin that thar little ticklebrush ye're a-raising '' ? ? `` Quit ragging him , Gran '' , Rod protested . `` I ain't ragging him '' ! ! Gran peered again at the week-old blond mustache shadowing Dan's upper lip . `` But honest-to-Betsy , I've seed more hair than that on a piece o' bacon '' . The two tall brothers waited silently while their mother handed Gran her cold snack and water jug , placed the chamber pot beside her feet , and returned to her place at the front of the wagon with Alice . `` Rheumatics worse , Pa '' ? ? Dan asked Hez , who had limped back from his team to hold the notched-stick chair braces in place while his boys swung up the tailgate and tied it tight at the ends . `` My right leg's stiff as a board this morning '' , he replied . `` But the sun'll fry it out'n me onct we git to rolling '' . The three men stepped out to the side to wait for Captain Clemens' signal . Hez looked up at the high face of Emigrant Rock , official signboard for the Raft River turnoff , and gloated , `` Seems funny that them Burnsides never took time to leave their John-Henry up thar '' . `` Wonder what made them hurry so '' , Rod drawled , giving Dan a sly wink . Dan grinned , and changed the subject . `` From now on , Sally and me and her folks aim to give you our turn when it comes up and fall in behind you and Rod's outfit '' . `` Ain't no sense you eating our dust '' , Rod protested . `` Sally and her ma want to trade off on account of Harmony being so far along '' , Dan explained . `` Jackson recruited his critters , and him and me fixed up his wagon while we was waiting for you to catch up . He's got the tightest running gear in the train now . Besides , 'tain't no more'n right for me to follow with my black oxen , so's I can unhook and pull up fast if either of you get in a pinch '' . Captain Clemens' signal shot sent the men hurrying to their waiting teams . `` Reckon ye're right , Dan '' , Hez called back over his shoulder . `` I'll shore be needing ye both on the pull out o' the canyon '' . Rod looked apprehensively ahead at the narrowing , precipice-walled gorge . `` We'll double teams zigzagging up the mountain , Harmony '' , he spoke reassuringly , concerned by the pinched look around her mouth . `` Like enough we'll all be up on top by sundown '' . Out of the corner of his eye , he could see his father's wheels beginning to turn . Before Harmony had a chance to reply , Rod cracked his long whip over his thin oxen's backs . While no larger than Dutch Springs , this mining supply town had the appearance of being far busier and more prosperous . Men crowded the streets and freight rigs and teams were moving about . Although they were forced to maintain a sharper watch , this activity enabled them to ride in and rack their broncs without any particular attention being paid them . `` Gyp'll be holdin' forth in some bar if he's here at all '' , Cobb declared , glancing along the street as they stretched their legs . There were no less than six or seven saloons in Ganado , not counting the lower class dives , all vying for the trade of celebrating miners and teamsters . Pat only nodded . `` Take one side of the street , and I'll take the other '' , he proposed . `` If you spot Carmer give a yell before you move in '' . Cobb's assent was tight . `` You do the same . It's all I ask , Stevens '' . Separating , they took different sides of the main drag and systematically combed the bars . Russ visited two places without result and his blood pressure was down to zero . Suddenly it seemed to him insane that they might hope to locate Gyp Carmer so casually , even were he to prove the thief . He tramped out of the Miners Rest with his hopes plummeting , and headed doggedly for the Palace Saloon , the last place of any consequence on this side of the street . The Palace was an elaborate establishment , built practically on stilts in front , with long flights of wooden steps running up to the porch . Behind its ornate facade the notorious dive clung like a bird's nest to the rocky ribs of the canyonside . Russ ran up the steps quickly to the plank porch . The front windows of the place were long and narrow , reaching nearly to the floor and affording an unusually good view of the interior . Heading for the batwings , Cobb glanced perfunctorily through the nearest window , and suddenly dodged aside . Nerves tight as a bowstring , he paused to gather his wits . Against all expectation , Carmer was inside , clearly enjoying himself to the hilt and already so tipsy that it seemed unlikely he was bothering to note anything or anyone about him . Fierce anger surged through Russ . He fought down the impulse to rush in and collar the vicious puncher on the spot . Reaching the porch rail beyond view of the bar windows , he feverishly scanned the busy street below . Stevens was nowhere in sight . Muffling an exclamation , Russ sprang to the nearest steps and ran down . As luck had it , he had not gone twenty feet in the street before Pat appeared . `` What luck , Cobb '' ? ? He said swiftly . Russ pointed upward . `` He's there '' , he got out tersely , curbing his rising excitement . Hitching his cartridge belt around , Pat glanced upward briefly at the Palace and started that way with Cobb at his side . Climbing the steps steadily , they reached the top and headed for the door . Pat pushed through first . Forced behind him momentarily , Russ followed at once and halted two steps inside . His eyes widened . While five minutes ago the place had presented a scene of easy revelry , with Gyp Carmer a prominent figure , it was now as somnolent and dull as the day before payday . Carmer himself was nowhere to be seen . A man knocked the roulette ball about idly in its track , and another dozed at one of the card tables . Two men murmured with their heads together at the end of the bar , while the sleek-headed bartender absently polished a glass . Looking the setup over , Stevens started coolly for the rear of the place . `` Where yuh goin' '' ? ? It was the barkeep . Halting , Pat turned to survey him deliberately . He did not reply , going on toward the back . Less assured than the tall , wide-shouldered man in the lead , Cobb followed alertly , a hand on his gun butt . The bartender measured this situation with heavy eyes and decided he wanted no part of it . He said no more . A hall opened in back of the bar , running toward an ell . Pat moved into it . Small rooms , probably for cards , opened off on either side . All the doors were open at this hour except one , and it was toward this that Stevens made his way with Russ close at his shoulder . The door was locked . A single kick made it spring open , shuddering . Pat saw Gyp Carmer staggering forward , a half-filled bottle upraised as if to strike . Russ sprang through to bat it nimbly aside . With a bellow Carmer lunged at him . But he was more than half-drunk , and his faculties were dulled . Cobb unleashed a single powerful jab that sent Gyp reeling wildly and crashing down with a whining groan . He started to struggle up , heaving desperately . Russ gave him a brutal thrust that tumbled him over flat on his stomach . Kneeling , Cobb planted a sturdy knee in the small of his back , holding him pinned . `` Okay , Stevens . I've drawn his fangs '' , he snapped . `` Go through his pockets , will you ? ? If we have to we'll take him apart and see what he's made of '' ! ! Complying methodically , Pat pulled pocket after pocket inside out without finding a thing . Cobb watched this with hunted eyes , his desperate hope waning by the moment . Stevens was grunting over the last empty pocket when Russ abruptly rose and lunged toward Carmer's hat , which had tumbled half-a-dozen feet away when he first fell . Cobb got it . Straightening up , his eyes ablaze , he held out the battered Stetson . `` Look at this '' ! ! Inside the crown , stuffed behind the stained sweatband , could be seen thin , crumpled wads of currency . Carmer's ingenious cache for his loot had been found . `` By golly , Stevens ! ! You were right '' , Russ exclaimed , tearing the loose bills out of Carmer's hat . `` That is , if we can be sure this is Colcord's money '' -- Pat grunted . `` Where else would he get it ? ? Count what you've got there , Cobb . We can soon tell '' . Russ ran through the bills and named an amount it was highly unlikely any cowpuncher would come by honestly . Pat nodded . `` It's within a hundred of what Crip had '' , he declared . `` We know Penny spent some -- and Carmer must have dropped a few dollars getting that load on '' . Handing the money over , Russ wiped his hands on his pants-legs as if ridding himself of something unclean . His glance at Gyp Carmer was disdainful . `` Shall we get out of here '' ? ? Leaving the card room , they moved back through the Palace the way they had come . Glowering looks met them in the bar , but there was no attempt to halt them . Pausing in the outside door to glance behind him , Pat looked his unspoken warning and stepped out . He and Cobb clattered down the high steps to the street . Neither spoke till they reached their horses . Pat paused there , looking across at the young fellow . It'll be a pleasure for you to return this money to Colcord and tell him about it , Russ '' . He started to return it . To his faint surprise Russ held up his hand . `` Not me '' , he ruled decidedly . I've had enough . It was you that tracked it down anyway , Stevens '' , he pursued strictly . `` I'll shove along home '' . `` Whatever you say '' . Pat swung into the saddle , yet still he delayed , his brows puckered . `` You owe it to Penny to give her a chance to explain that she was defending you , really '' , he observed mildly . `` Old Crip wasn't '' , retorted Cobb tartly . `` He'll know when you tell him . But I want this to sink in awhile . Then maybe next time he won't be so quick on the trigger '' . `` Pat had never pretended to give advice in such affairs . `` You're the doctor '' , he returned with a smile . `` But I still think Penny's an awful nice girl , Russ '' -- `` You don't have to tell me '' , flashed Cobb . Giving the other a dark look , he hauled his bronc around and trotted down off the street . Pat let him go , following more leisurely . At the first restaurant he sensibly pulled up to go in for his dinner , and as a consequence did not see Cobb strike the open range at the mouth of the canyon and head straight across the swells for Antler . The truth was , the puncher was both bewildered and dismayed by his own mixed luck . `` Penny's always glad to see me over there '' , he mused bleakly . Yet had he not visited the girl at Saw Buck he would never have been involved in this latest tangle . Over and above that , however , was his growing suspicion of Chuck Stober's part in recent events . `` Gyp Carmer couldn't have known about Colcord's money unless he was told -- and who else would have told him '' ? ? He asked himself . `` It's the second time War Ax hands made a play for that money . How much of an accident could that be '' ? ? Nearing home , he jerked to attention at the distant crack of a gun . In town no one paid much attention to an occasional shot ; ; but on the range gunfire had a meaning . Hauling up , Russ listened carefully . Two minutes later it came again -- a double explosion , followed by a third , sounding more distant . As near as Cobb could determine the shots came from the direction of the Antler ranch house . He tightened up in a twinkling . So far as he knew , only his father could be there . What did it mean ? ? Clapping spurs to the bronc he set off at a sharp canter , with growing alarm . His first glimpse of the ranch house across the brushy swells told him nothing . Still a quarter-mile away , the fresh clap of guns only served to increase his speed . Setting a course straight for the house , he was covering ground fast when an angry bee buzzed past close to his face . When it was followed by a second , whining even closer , Cobb swerved sharply aside into a depression . He knew now what he was up against . Whoever was out there hiding in the brushy cover was besieging the Antler house and , having spotted his approach , was determined to drive him off before he could get into the fight . Cursing himself for having ridden out the last few days without a rifle in his saddle boot , Russ drew his Colt and examined it briefly . If he wondered whether the attackers would allow him to pull away unmolested , he had his answer a moment later . `` Over this way ! ! He ain't gone far '' ! ! A harsh cry floated to him across the brush . A carbine cracked more loudly , and a slug clipped fragments from the brush off at one side . The would-be assassin had his position figured pretty close . Dismounting , Russ looked about hastily . Toward the west this depression led toward a draw . Leading his pony , he hurried that way , not remounting till he was well below the level of the surrounding range . Swinging up then , and bending forward over the horn , he urged his mount down the meandering draw . He had not covered a hundred yards before a gun crashed from somewhere behind . He had been sighted , and his attacker pumping shot after shot . A shot or two went wild before Cobb felt something tug at his foot . A slug had torn half of his stirrup-guard away . A second twitched his shirtsleeve , and he felt a brief burn on his upper arm . Another snarled close overhead . `` Jumping Jerusalem ! ! Let's get out of here '' ! ! At the first shot Russ had hurled his mount to the left toward the side of the winding draw . The long minute before he reached effective cover seemed endless . Sweeping a look around , he saw that he was safe for the moment . He heard cries from behind him , but he could make out no words . He dashed madly for the next elbow turn in the draw , and made it . Recklessly hurling the bronc sidewise into an intersecting draw , he plunged forward with undiminished speed . Gradually the wash climbed upward , forcing him toward open range . Yet he must chance it . He clambered out of the dwindling wash , the loose dirt flying behind him , and flashed a look about . Early in November the clouds lifted enough to carry out the assigned missions . And Sweeney Squadron put its first marks on the combat record . Every plane that could fly was sent into the air . Cricket took eight ships and went south across the Straits and along the north coast of Mindanao to Cagayan . Anything the enemy flew or floated was his target . Fleischman with eight was to patrol the Leyte Gulf area , with his main task to get any kamikaze before they got to the ships . Greg himself took two flights , with Todman leading the second , to patrol and look for targets of opportunities around Ormoc on the east coast of Leyte . Each plane carried two five-hundred pound bombs . A weapons carrier took Greg , Todman , Belton , Banjo Ferguson , and Walters and the others the two miles from the bivouac area to the strip . It was a rough long ride through the mud and pot holes . No one had much to say . The sky glowered down at them . There was a feeling that this mission would be canceled like all the others and that this muddy wet dark world of combat would go on forever . The truck dropped them off at the various revetments spread through the jungle . Donovan snatched Greg's chute from him with a belligerent motion and almost ran to the plane with it . His face was dark as the sky above it as he stood on the wing and waited for his pilot . Greg climbed into the cockpit feeling as if he had never been in one before . But his hands and those of Donovan moved automatically adjusting and arranging in the check-out procedure . `` I've got her as neat as I can '' , Donovan said , as he dropped the straps of the Seton harness over Greg's shoulders . `` But this goddamn climate . It's for carabao not airplanes '' . `` We'll make out . Don't you worry , chief '' , Greg replied , wondering if he himself believed it . `` Yeah . See you '' , Donovan said as he jumped off the wing . The expression was his trade-mark , his open sesame to good luck , and his prayer that pilot and plane would always return . At the prearranged time , Greg started the engine and taxied out . From the time the chocks were pulled until the plane was out of sight , he knew Donovan would keep his back to the strip . He wondered where the superstition had originated that it was bad luck for a crew chief to watch his plane take off on a combat mission . Yet long before the scheduled time for return , Donovan would be watching for every speck in the sky . Greg rumbled down the rough metal taxi strip , and one by one the seven members of his flight fell in behind him . The dark brown bombs hanging under each wing looked large and powerful . The pilots' heads looked ridiculously small . The control tower gave him immediate take-off permission , and the clean roar of the engine that took him off the rough strip spoke well of the skill of Donovan . Greg's mission was the last to leave , and as he circled the ships off Tacloban he saw the clouds were dropping down again . To the west , the dark green hills of Leyte were lost in the clouds about halfway up their slopes . Underneath him the sea was a dark and muddied gray . Water splashed against his windshield as he led the flight in and out of showers . The metal strip they had taken off from was coal black against the green jungle around it . He possessed the fighter pilot's horror of bad weather and instrument flying , and he wondered , if the ceiling did drop , whether he and the other flights would be able to find their way back in this unfamiliar territory . He shivered in the warm cockpit . The overcast was solid above him . As far as he could see there was no hole to climb through it . They would have to go west through the narrow river valley that separated Leyte from Samar and hope that it didn't close in before they returned . Greg pushed the radio button on his throttle . `` Todman , let's try to go under this stuff . Stay in close and we'll go up the valley '' . `` Roger , Sweeney '' , Todman called back , and pulled his four in and slightly above Greg . Greg took the formation wide around three A-26 attack bombers that were headed north over the Gulf . He dropped down to five hundred feet , swinging a little north of the city of Tacloban , and punched into the opening that showed against the mountain . The valley was only a few hundred yards wide with just about room enough for a properly performed hundred-and-eighty-degree turn . It was only a fifteen-minute flight , but before it was through Greg felt himself developing a case of claustrophobia . The ceiling stayed solid above them at about eight hundred feet , and at times the sheer cliffs seemed about to close in . If the other pilots were worried , they did not show it . The formation remained perfect . When the sea was visible ahead of them , the relief was as great as if the sun had come out . He spread the flight out and led them across a point of land and then down the coast . Although they drew light ground fire they saw no signs of activity . Once Todman thought he had spotted a tank and went down to investigate while Greg covered him . `` Somebody beat us to it '' ! ! Todman said over the radio as he came back up in formation . Visibility continued to be limited , and Greg was never able to get above a thousand feet . It was frustrating . His earphones were constantly full of the sounds of enemy contacts made by other flights . He thought once that he identified the somewhat hysterical voice of Fleischman claiming a kill . But Greg's area remained as placid as a Florida dawn . Finally , as time began to run out , he headed into Ormoc and glide-bombed a group of houses that Intelligence had thought might contain Japanese supplies . The low clouds made bombing difficult . There was not enough room to make the usual vertical bomb run . The accuracy was deplorable . One of Greg's bombs hung up , and he was miles from the target before he could get rid of it . Only one of the flight scored a direct hit and the rest blew up jungle . With their load of bombs gone , the planes moved swiftly and easily . Greg went up tight against the ceiling and led them back to their pass to home . Mercifully , it was still open . Like a man making a deep dive , Greg took full breath and plunged back into the valley . He was about to make a gas check on his flight when Todman's voice broke in : `` Sweeneys ! ! Three bogies . Twelve o'clock level '' . Greg's eyes flicked up from his instrument panel . He saw them , specks against the gray , but closing fast . They were headed straight for each other on a collision course . Friend or enemy ? ? The same old question . And only a few seconds to answer it . `` Zeros '' ! ! Todman said excitedly , and hopefully . And then he thought Todman might be right . His mind flicked through the mental pictures he had from the hours of Aircraft Identification . He narrowed the shape down to two : either a Zero or a U. S. Navy type aircraft . If it were the enemy , tactically his position was correct . Japanese aircraft were strong on maneuverability , American on speed and firepower . His present maximum altitude , up against the overcast , gave him the opportunity to exploit his advantages . But it also made him conspicuous to the enemy , if it was the enemy , and he hadn't been spotted already . But the closing aircraft showed no sign of deviating from their original course . In seconds , Greg made his decision . He pushed the radio button . `` Sweeney Blue , hit the deck . Lots of throttle . Todman , you take the one on the left . I'll take the middle . Belton , the one on the right . If they're Japs . Let's make sure first '' . Greg had the stick forward and the throttle up before he heard the two `` Rogers '' . The planes , light with most of the gas burned out , responded beautifully . Greg's airspeed indicator was over 350 when he leveled off just above the trees . The opposing aircraft continued to come on . They appeared to be the enemy . Greg wished the Air Corps had continued to camouflage planes . There was , of course , no way for the other planes to get by them . It was a box . But they could turn and escape to the east . Greg pushed the radio button again . `` Todman , drop your second element back . If any of us miss , they can pick up the pieces . Now let's make sure they're Japs '' . Even as he said it , Greg knew they had found the enemy . The shapes were unmistakable and the Rising Suns were showing up , slightly brighter pinpoints in the gray gloom . Greg slapped his hand across the switches that turned on the guns and gun camera and gun sight . The circle with the dot in the center showed up yellow on the reflector glass in front of him . His hands shook . `` Arm your guns , Sweeneys '' . `` They're Japs . They're Japs '' , came a high-pitched voice . `` Greg to Sweeney Blue . One pass only . No turns . You'll bust your ass in this canyon . That's an order '' . He moved the flights over against one wall . It gave them all a chance to make a high-speed climbing turn attack and a break-away that would not take them into the overcast or force a tight-turn recovery . If the turn was too tight , a barrel roll would bring them out . A hell of an altitude for a barrel roll , but it could be done . Greg slammed his throttle to the fire wall and rammed up the RPM , and the engine responded as if it had been waiting . The clearly identifiable enemy continued on as if no one else were around . `` They haven't seen us '' , Greg yelled to himself over the engine noise . `` They haven't seen us '' . He hit the radio button . `` Now , Sweeneys , now . Let's take 'em home '' . He hauled back on the stick and felt his cheeks sag . Out of the corner of his eye , he watched his wingman move out a bit and shoot up with him . Perfect , he thought . With the rapid rate of closure , the approach from below , the side , and ahead , there would be only a moment when damage could be done . Just like shooting at a duck while performing a half-gainer from a diving board . He tightened his turn . His nose up . It was going to be dangerous . Eight aircraft in this small box . Please , dear God , make my pilots good , he prayed . He took a lead on the enemy , using a distance of five of the radii in his circular sight and then added another . The enemy did not veer . It did not seem possible that they hadn't been spotted . Blind fools . Now ! ! Greg's fingers closed on the stick trigger . The plane rumbled and slowed . Six red lines etched their way into the gray and vanished . As if drawn by a wire the enemy flew into them . Greg tightened his turn until the plane shuddered . Luck was with him . His burst held for a second on the engine section of the plane . The Jap's propeller flew off in pieces . A large piece of engine cowling vanished . It was all Greg had time to see . His maneuvering for the shot had placed him near the overcast , almost inverted and heading up into the clouds . His speed was dropping rapidly . If he spun out now , he would join his opponent on the ground . Wingman , stay clear , he prayed . He pushed stick and rudder and entered the overcast on his back . He fought the panic of vertigo . He had no idea which was up and which was down . He held the controls where they had been . Sweat popped out over him and he felt the slick between his palm and the stick grip . His air speed dropped until he thought he would spin out . Over the rattling of fenders , humming of tires and chattering of gears there was a charming melody of whispers and tiny giggles . Cool air moving slowly through the open or smashed-out side windows hinted of blooming roadside vegetation , and occasionally a faint fragrance of perfume swirled from the back seat . `` Moriarty '' , my driver suddenly exclaimed with something so definite , so final in his tone I once more repeated the absurdity , mustering all my latent powers of hypocrisy to sound convinced . We were coming to an intersection , turning right , chuffing to a stop . Forced to realize that this was the end of a very short line I scanned a road marker and discovered what the end of a slightly longer line would be for the old Mexican : Moriarty , New Mexico . `` Gracias . Adios '' , I said , exhausting my Spanish vocabulary on my host and exchanging one of a scarcely-tapped store of smiles with my host's daughters . I waved with discretion and moderation to the vague golden faces fading through rising dust and the distortions of the back window glass . Then I saw the father's head slightly turn ; ; gauche rainbow shapes replaced the poignant ovals of gold . Autos whizzed past . White-shirted and conservatively-cravated drivers stared conspicuously toward the eastern horizon and past my supplicating and accusing gaze . Suddenly a treble auto horn tootley-toot-tootled , and , thumbing hopefully , I saw emergent in windshield flash : red lips , streaming silk of blonde hair and -- ah , trembling confusion of hope , apprehension , despair -- the leering face of old Herry . `` Mor-ee-air-teeeee '' , he shrieked , his white teeth grossly counterpointing those of the glittering blonde . Over the rapidly-diminishing outline of a jump seat piled high with luggage Herry's black brushcut was just discernible , near , or enviably near that spot where -- hidden -- more delicately-textured , most beautifully tinted hair must still be streaming back in cool , oh cool wind sweetly perfumed with sagebrush and yucca flowers and engine fumes . Damn his luck . I would have foregone my romantic chances rather than leave a friend sweltering and dusty and -- Well , at least I wouldn't have shouted back a taunt . Still nursing anger I listlessly thumbed a car that was slowly approaching , its pre-war chrome nearly blinding me . It was stopping . Just as I straightened up with my duffel bag , I heard : `` Sahjunt Yoorick , meet Mrs. Major J. A. Roebuck '' . The voice was that of Johnson , tail gunner off another crew . Squeezing a look between Johnson's fat jowls and the car frame a handsome and still darkhaired lady inquired `` Y'all drahve '' ? ? I nodded . `` Onleh one thiihng '' , Mrs. Roebuck continued . `` Ahm goin nawth t'jawn mah husbun in Sante Fe , an y'all maht prefuh the suhthuhn rewt . But Corporal Johnson has alreadeh said it didn make no diffrunce t'hi-im '' . I said that it didn't make any difference to me either , as far as I knew . How far I knew will shortly become apparent . Let me pass over the trip to Sante Fe with something of the same speed which made Mrs. Roebuck `` wonduh if the wahtahm speed limit '' ( 35 m.p.h. ) `` is still in ee-faket '' . I let up on the accelerator , only to gradually reach again the 60 m.p.h. which would , I hoped , overhaul Herry and the blonde , and as there were cars whose drivers apparently had something more important to catch than had I , Mrs. Major Roebuck settled down to practicing on Corporal Johnson the kittenish wiles she would need when making her duty call on Colonel and Mrs. Somebody in Sante Fe . When Johnson ejaculated `` Howsabout my buying us all a nice cold Co-cola , Ma'am '' ? ? Mrs. Roebuck smilingly declined and began suddenly to go on about her son , who was `` onleh a little younguh than you bawhs '' . Johnson never would have believed she had a son that age . Mrs. Roebuck thought Johnson was a `` sweet bawh t'lah lahk thet '' , but her Herman was getting to be a man , there was no getting around it . `` Just befoh he left foh his academeh we wuh hevin dack-rihs on the vuhranduh , Major Roebuck an Ah , an Huhmun says ' May Ah hev one too ' ? ? Just as p'lite an -- an cohnfidunt , an Ah says ' Uh coahse you cain't ' , but he says ' Whah nawt , you ah hevin one ' ? ? An Ah coudn ansuh him an so Ah said ' Aw right , Ah gay-ess , an his fathuh didn uttuh one wohd an aftuh Huhmun was gone , the majuh laughed an tole me thet he an the bawh had been hevin an occasional drink t'gethuh f'ovuh a yeah , onleh an occasional one , but just the same it was behahn mah back , an Ah doan think thet's nahce at all , d'you '' ? ? `` No , I don't '' , Johnson said . `` I'm a good Baptist , and drinking '' Mrs. Roebuck very kindly let me drive through Sante Fe to a road which would , she said , lead us to Taos and then Raton and `` eventshahleh '' out of New Mexico . How lightly her `` eventshah-leh '' passed into the crannies where I was storing dialect material for some vaguely dreamed opus , and how the word would echo . And re-echo . Hardly had Mrs. Roebuck driven off when a rusty pick-up truck , father or grandfather of Senor `` Moriarty's '' Ford sedan , came screeching to a dust-swirling stop , and a brown face appeared , its nose threatened by shards of what had once been the side window . `` Get in , buddies . Get in '' . The straight , black hair flopped in a vigorous nod , the slender nose plunged toward glass teeth and drew safely back . Johnson unwired the right hand door , whose window was , like the left one , merely loosely-taped fragments of glass , and Johnson wadded himself into a narrow seat made still more narrow by three cases of beer . `` In back , buddy '' , the driver said to me . Quickly but carefully lowering my duffel bag over the low side-rack , I stepped on the running board ; ; it flopped down , sprang back up and gouged my shin . The truck was hurtling forward . I seized the rack and made a western-style flying-mount just in time , one of my knees mercifully landing on my duffel bag -- and merely wrecking my camera , I was to discover later -- my other knee landing on the slivery truck floor boards and -- but this is no medical report . I was again in motion and at a speed which belied the truck's similarity to Senor X's Ford turtle . Maybe I would beat old Herry to Siberia after all . Whatever satisfaction that might offer . Something pulled my leg . I drew back , drawing back my foot for a kick . But it was only Johnson reaching around the wire chicken fencing , which half covered the truck cab's glassless rear window . The way his red rubber lips were stretched across his pearly little teeth I thought he was only having a little joke , but , no , he wanted me to bend down from the roar of wind so he could roar something into my ear . `` Wanna beer '' ? ? `` Hell , yes '' , I roared back between dusty lips . Did I want a beer ? ? Did an anteater want ants ? ? `` Bueno , amigo . Gracias '' , I hollered , my first long swallow filling me with confidence and immediately doubling the size of my Spanish vocabulary . At once my ears were drowned by a flow of what I took to be Spanish , but -- the driver's white teeth flashing at me , the road wildly veering beyond his glistening hair , beyond his gesticulating bottle -- it could have been the purest Oxford English I was half hearing ; ; I wouldn't have known the difference . Johnson was trying to grab the wheel , though the swerve of the truck was throwing him away from it . White teeth suddenly vanishing , the driver slammed the side of his bottle against Johnson's ear . We were off the road , gleaming barbed wire pulling taut . I ducked just as the first strand broke somewhere down the line and came whipping over the sideboards . We were in a field , in a tight , screeching turn . Prairie dogs were popping up and popping down . When I fell on my back , I saw a vulture hovering . Just as I got to my knees , there was again the sound of the fence stretching , and I had time only to start taking my kneeling posture seriously . This time no wire came whipping into the truck . We were back on the road . I regained my squatting position behind the truck cab's rear window . Johnson's left hand was pressed against the side of his head , red cheeks whitening beneath his fingers . `` Tee-wah '' , the driver cackled , his black eyes glittering behind dull silver chicken fencing . `` That was Tee-wah I was talking . You thought I was a Mexican , didn't you , buddy '' ? ? I nodded . `` Hell , that's all right , buddy '' , the Indian ( I now guessed ) said . `` Drink your beer '' . Miraculously , the bottle was still in my hand , foam still geysering over my ( luckily ) waterproof watch . No sooner had I started drinking than the driver started zigzagging the truck . The beer foamed furiously . I drank furiously . A long time . Emptied the bottle . Teeth again flashing back at me , the driver released a deluge of Spanish in which `` amigo '' appeared every so often like an island in the stormy waves of surrounding sound . I bobbed my head each time it appeared . Suddenly the Spanish became an English in which only one word emerged with clarity and precision , `` son of a bitch '' , sometimes hyphenated by vicious jabs of a beer bottle into Johnson's quivering ribs . A big car was approaching , its chrome teeth grinning . Beyond it the gray road stretched a long , long way . The car was just about to us , its driver's fat , solemn face intent on the road ahead , on business , on a family in Sante Fe -- on anything but an old pick-up truck in which two human beings desperately needed rescue . I tossed the bottle . High , so it would only bounce harmlessly but loudly off the car's steel roof . Too high . On unoccupied roadway the bottle shattered into a small amber flash . `` Aye-yah-ah-ah '' ! ! The Indian was again raising his bottle , but to my astonished relief -- probably only a fraction of Johnson's -- the bottle this time went to the Indian's lips . Another car was coming , a tiny , dark shape on a far hill . I started looking on the splintery truck bed for a piece of board , a dirt clod -- anything I could throw and with better aim than I had thrown the beer bottle . We were slowing . In the ditch sand was white and soft-looking , only an occasional pebble discernible , faintly gleaming . But Johnson couldn't quickly unwire the truck door , and if I escaped , he might suffer . The car was approaching fast . On the truck bed there was nothing smaller than a piece of rusty machinery ; ; with more time I could have loosened a small burr or cotter pin -- Suddenly and not a second too soon I thought of the coins in my pocket . There was no time to pick out a penny ; ; I got a coin between my thumb and forefinger , leaned my elbows in a very natural and casual manner on top of the truck cab and flipped my little missile . There was a blur just under my focus of vision , a crash ; ; the car's far windshield panel turned into a silver web with a dark hole in the center . I heard the screech of brakes behind me , an insane burst of laughter beneath me . Looking back I saw a gray-haired man getting out of his halted car and trying to read our license number . `` S-s-sahjunt '' . Johnson's fat hand , another bottle were protruding from the truck cab , and that self-proclaimed Baptist teetotaler , had a bottle at his own lips . Two cars came over a crest , their chrome and glass flashing . The Indian's arm whipped sidewise -- there was a flash of amber and froth , the crash of the bottle shattering against the side of the first car . Brakes shrieked behind us . I saw Johnson's bottle snatched from his hand , saw it go in a swirl of foam just behind the second car . This time there was no sound of brakes but the shrieking of women . I looked back at pale ovals framed in the elongated oval of the car's rear window . `` Drink , you son of a bitch '' ! ! I quickly turned around and began to drink . But the Indian was jabbing another bottle toward Johnson . I guided her to the divan , turned off the TV , faced her . She sat quietly , staring at me from the wide eyes . And what eyes they were . Big and dark , a melting , golden brown . Eyes like hot honey , eyes that sizzled . Plus flawless skin , smooth brow and cheeks , lips that looked as if you could get a shock from them . It was a disturbingly familiar face , too , but I couldn't remember where we had met . I said , `` Do we know each other , Miss '' ? ? `` No , I remembered reading about you in the papers and that you lived here , and when it happened all I could think of was '' -- This time she stopped the rush of words herself . `` I'm sorry . Shall I go on '' ? ? She smiled . It was her first smile . But worth waiting for . `` Sure '' . I said . `` But one word at a time , O.K. '' ? ? She was still hugging the stained coat around her , so I said , `` Relax , let me take your things . Would you like a drink , or coffee '' ? ? `` No , thanks '' . She stood up , pulled the coat from her shoulders and started to slide it off , then let out a high-pitched scream and I let out a low-pitched , wobbling sound like a muffler blowing out . She was wearing nothing beneath the coat . She jerked the coat back on and squeezed it around her again , but not soon enough . There had been a good second or two during which my muffler had been blowing out , and now I was certain I'd seen her somewhere before . `` I forgot '' ! ! She yelped . `` Oh , do forgive me . I'm sorry '' ! ! `` I forgive '' -- `` That's what started all the trouble in the first place . Oh , dear , I'm all unstrung '' . `` You and me both , dear . Haven't we haven't I seen you . I mean , surely we've '' -- `` You may have seen me on TV '' , she said . `` I've done several filmed commercials for '' -- Then it hit me . `` Zing '' ! ! I cried . `` Why , yes . And you recognized me '' ? ? `` Yes , indeed . In fact , I was watching you on that little seventeen-inch screen when you rang my bell . Man , you rang -- it was in color , too , Miss , and Miss ? ? What's your name , anyway ? ? Ah , you were splendid '' . I sat by her on the divan . `` Splendid . In a waterfall and all that '' . `` That's the last one we did . That was a fun one '' . `` I'll bet . It was fun for me , all right . I don't mean to pry , but do they hide the swimsuit with the bubbles ? ? I mean : Is advertising honest ? ? `` It depends on who does it . I never wear anything at all . It wouldn't -- wouldn't seem fair , somehow '' . `` I couldn't agree with you more '' . `` I really do have something important to tell you , Mr. Scott . About the murder '' . `` Murder ? ? Oh , yeah '' , I said . `` Tell me about the murder '' . She told me . Zing was the creation of two men , Louis Thor and Bill Blake , partners in zing ! ! , Inc. . They'd peddled the soap virtually alone , and without much success , until about a year ago , when -- with the addition of `` SX-21 '' to their secret formula and the inauguration of a high-powered advertising campaign -- sales had soared practically into orbit . Their product had been endorsed by Good Housekeeping , the A.M.A. , and the Veterinary Journal , among other repositories of higher wisdom , and before much longer if you didn't have a cake of their soap in the john , even your best friends would think you didn't bathe . My lovely caller -- Joyce Holland was her name -- had previously done three filmed commercials for zing , and this evening , the fourth , a super production , had been filmed at the home of Louis Thor . The water in Thor's big swimming pool had been covered with a blanket of thick , foamy soapsuds -- fashioned , of course , from zing -- Joyce had dived from the board into the pool , then swirled and cavorted in her luxurious `` bath '' while cameras rolled . The finished -- and drastically cut -- product would begin with a hazy longshot of Joyce entering the suds , then bursting above the pool's surface clad in layers of lavender lather , and I had a hunch this item was going to sell tons and tons of soap ; ; even to clean men and boys . Joyce went on , `` When we'd finished , Lou -- Mr. Thor -- asked me to stay a little longer . He wanted a few stills for magazine ads , he said . Everybody left and I stayed in the pool , then Lou came back alone and leaped into the pool too . And he didn't have any clothes on '' . `` He didn't '' ! ! `` Yes , he didn't . Did , I mean '' . She paused . `` Did leap into the pool , and didn't have anything on . Anyway , it was evident what he had in mind '' . `` You got away , didn't you '' ? ? `` Yes . He caught up with me once and grabbed me , but I was all covered with zing -- it's very slippery , you know '' . `` I didn't know . I wouldn't have the stuff in the house . But I'm pleased to hear '' -- `` So I just scooted out of his clutches . I swam like mad , got out of the pool , grabbed my robe , and ran to the car . The keys were still in it , and I was miles away before I remembered that my clothes and purse and everything were still in the little cabana where I'd changed '' . She'd driven around for a while , Joyce said , then , thinking Louis Thor would have calmed down by that time , she'd gone back to his home on Bryn Mawr Drive , parked in front , and walked toward the pool . While several yards from it , still concealed by the shrubbery , she'd seen two men on her left at the pool's edge . She went on : `` A man was holding onto Lou , holding him up . Maybe Lou was only unconscious , but right then I thought he must be dead . The man shoved him into the water , then ran past the cabana . There's a walk there that goes out to Quebec Drive . I was so scared well , I just ran to my car and came here '' . `` You know who the other man was '' ? ? `` No , I never did see his face . I didn't get a good look at him at all , his back was to me , and I was so scared It was just somebody in a man's suit . But I'm sure the other one was Lou '' . What Joyce wanted me to do was go to Thor's house and `` do whatever detectives do '' , and get her clothes -- and handbag containing her identification . She realized I'd have to notify the police , but fervently hoped I could avoid mentioning her name . Her impact in the zing commercials had led to her being considered for an excellent part in an upcoming TV series , Underwater Western Eye , a documentary-type show to be sponsored by Oatnut Grits . But if Joyce got involved in murder or salacious scandal , the role would probably go to the sponsor's wife , Mrs. Oatnut Grits . Or at least not to Joyce . `` And I so want the part '' , she said . `` The commercials have just been for money , there hasn't been any real incentive for me to do them , but in Underwater Western Eye I'd have a chance to act . I could show what I can do '' . As far as I was concerned , she had already and had dandily shown what she could do . But I promised Joyce I would mention her name , if at all , only as a last resort . Seeming much relieved , she smiled one of those worth-waiting-for smiles , and I smiled all the way into the bedroom . There I got my Colt Special and shoulder harness , slipped my coat on , and went back into the front room . Joyce squirmed a little on the divan . `` I'm starting to itch '' , she said . `` Itch '' ? ? `` Yes , I'm still all covered with that soap . I was loaded with suds when I ran away , and I haven't had a chance to wash it off . Mmmm , it sure itches '' . `` You might as well wait here while I'm gone , so you can use my shower if you'd like '' . `` Oh , I'd love to '' . I showed her the shower and tub , and she said , smiling , `` If you really don't mind , I think I'll get clean in the shower , then soak for a few minutes in your tub . That always relaxes me . Doesn't it you '' ? ? `` Only when I do it '' . I shook my head . One of my virtues or vices is a sort of three-dimensional imagination complete with sound effects and glorious living color . `` Soak as long as you want , Joyce . It'll probably be at least an hour or two before I can check back with you . So you'll have everything all to yourself , doggone '' I looked at my watch . Ten after nine . Time to go , I supposed . `` Well , goodbye '' , I said . `` Goodbye . You'd better hurry '' . `` Oh , you can count on that '' . She smiled slightly . Softly . Warmly . `` Don't hurry too much . I'll be soaking for at least half an hour '' . That was all she said . But suddenly those hot-honey eyes seemed to have everything but swarms of bees in them . However , when there's a job to be done , I'm a monstrosity of grim determination , I like to think . I spun about and clattered through the front room to the door . As I went out , I could hear water pouring in the shower . Hot water . She wouldn't be taking a cold shower . Hell , she couldn't . Bryn Mawr Drive is only two or three miles from the Spartan , and it took me less than five minutes to get there . But the scene was not the quiet , calm scene I'd expected . Four cars were parked at the curb , and two of them were police radio cars . Lights blazed in the big house and surrounding grounds . I followed a shrubbery-lined gravel path alongside the house to the pool . Two uniformed officers , a couple of plain-clothesmen I knew , and two other men stood on a gray cement area next to the pool on my left . At the pool's far end was the little cabana Joyce had mentioned , and on the water's surface floated scattered lavender patches of limp-looking lather . A few yards beyond the group of men , a man's nude body lay face down on a patch of thick green dichondra . Lieutenant Rawlins , one of the plain-clothesmen , spotted me and said , `` Hi , Shell '' , and walked toward me . `` How'd you hear about this one '' ? ? I grinned , but ignored the question . He didn't push it ; ; Rawlins worked out of Central Homicide and we'd been friends for years . He filled me in . A call to the police had been placed from here a couple of minutes after nine P.M. , and the first police car had arrived two or three minutes after that -- 10 minutes ago now . Present at the scene -- in addition to the dead man , who was indeed Louis Thor -- had been Thor's partner Bill Blake , and Antony Rose , an advertising agency executive who handled the zing account . Neither of them , I understood , had been present at the filming session earlier . `` What were they doing here '' ? ? I asked Rawlins . `` They were supposed to meet Thor at nine PM for a conference concerning the ad campaign for their soap , a new angle based on this SX-21 stuff '' . `` Yeah , I've heard more about SX-21 than space exploration lately . What is the gunk '' ? ? `` How would I know ? ? It's a secret . That was the new advertising angle -- something about a Lloyd's of London policy to insure the secrecy of the secret ingredient . Actually , only two men know what the formula is , Blake and '' -- He stopped and looked at Thor's body . I said , `` O.K. , so now only Blake knows . How's it strike you , foul or fair '' ? ? `` Can't say yet . Deputy coroner says it looks like he sucked in a big pile of those thick suds and strangled on 'em . The PM might show he drowned instead , but that's what the once-over-lightly gives us . Accident , murder , suicide -- take your pick '' . `` I'll pick murder . Anything else '' ? ? `` According to Rose , he arrived here a couple minutes before nine and spotted Thor in the water , got a hooked pole from the pool-equipment locker and started hauling him out . Too many people think that the primary purpose of a higher education is to help you make a living ; ; this is not so , for education offers all kinds of dividends , including how to pull the wool over a husband's eyes while you are having an affair with his wife . If it were not for an old professor who made me read the classics I would have been stymied on what to do , and now I understand why they are classics ; ; those who wrote them knew people and what made people tick . I worked for my Uncle ( an Uncle by marriage so you will not think this has a mild undercurrent of incest ) who ran one of those antique shops in New Orleans' Vieux Carre , the old French Quarter . The arrangement I had with him was to work four hours a day . The rest of the time I devoted to painting or to those other activities a young and healthy man just out of college finds interesting . I had a one-room studio which overlooked an ancient courtyard filled with flowers and plants , blooming everlastingly in the southern sun . I had come to New Orleans two years earlier after graduating college , partly because I loved the city and partly because there was quite a noted art colony there . When my Uncle offered me a part-time job which would take care of my normal expenses and give me time to paint I accepted . The arrangement turned out to be excellent . I loved the city and I particularly loved the gaiety and spirit of Mardi Gras . I had seen two of them and we would soon be in another city-wide , joyous celebration with romance in the air ; ; and , when you took a walk you never knew what adventure or pair of sparkling eyes were waiting around the next corner . The very faces of the people bore this expectation of fun and pleasure . It was as if they could hardly wait to get into their costumes , cover their faces with masks and go adventuring . My Uncle and I were not too close socially because of the difference in our ages . Sometimes I wondered vaguely what he did about women for my Aunt , by blood , had died some years ago , but neither of us said anything . One Monday morning I saw him approach the store with a woman and introduce me to her as my new Aunt . They were married over the week-end , though he was easily sixty and she could not have been even thirty . She looked more like twenty-five or six . It was really a May and December combination . My new Aunt was perhaps three or four years older than I and it had been a long time since I had seen as gorgeous a woman who oozed sex . There was something about the contour of her face , her smile that was like New Orleans sunshine , the way she held her head , the way she walked -- there was scarcely anything she did which did not fascinate me . Her legs were the full , sexy kind , full bodied like a rare wine and just as tantalizing to the appetite ; ; the calf was magnificent , the ankle perfect . You must forgive me if I seem to dwell too much on her physical aspects but I am an artist , accustomed to studying the physical body . The true artist is like one of those scientists who , from a single bone can reconstruct an animal's entire body . The artist looks at an ankle , a calf , a bosom and , in his mind's eye , the clothes drop away and he sees her as she really is . And that is the way I first saw her when my Uncle brought her into his antique store . That she impressed me instantly was obvious ; ; I was aware that when our eyes met we both quickly averted them . I thought I saw a faint surge of color rise to her neck and quickly suffuse her cheeks . True , she was my Aunt , married to an Uncle related to me only by marriage , but why she had married a man twice her age , and more , perhaps , I did not know or much care . She was standing with her back to the glass door . Her form was silhouetted and with the strong light I could see the outlines of her body , a body that an artist or anyone else would have admired . As it is in so many affairs of the heart , a man and a woman meet and something clicks . Something clicked in this instance , but I treated her circumspectly and I felt that she knew it , for we both kept our distance . When she appeared at the store to help out for a few hours even my looking at her was surreptitious lest my Uncle notice it . And then I became aware that she , too , glanced at me surreptitiously . I felt that her eyes were undressing me as if she were a painter and I a nude model . I dismissed these feelings as wishful thinking but I could not get it out of my head that we had a strong physical attraction for one another and we both feared to dwell on it because of our relationship . When our eyes met the air was filled with an unuttered message of `` Me , too '' . You have probably experienced this . It is nothing you can put your fingers on but the air suddenly fills with a high charge of electricity . Why she married him I do not know . I myself was fond of him but what a young woman half his age saw in him was a mystery to me . He already had that slow pace that comes over the elderly , while she herself had all the signs of one who appreciates the joys of living . Perhaps , with my Uncle , she found a measure of economic security that she needed ; ; or maybe she liked men old enough to be her father ; ; some women with father fixations do . For several weeks we eyed one another almost like sparring partners , and then one day Uncle was slightly indisposed and stayed home ; ; his bride opened the store . I was waiting in front of it when she showed up and told me of my Uncle's indisposition . Even as she was telling me about it I became aware of a give-away flush that suffused her neck and moved upwards to her cheeks , and subconsciously I realized that when she entered the store she did not switch on the lights . The cavernous depth , cluttered with antiques , echoed to her hard heels as she walked directly to the office in the rear and took the seat at his desk . She placed her palms , fingers outspread , on the desk in an odd gesture as if to say , `` Now , what next '' ? ? I was aware of a humid look in her eyes that told me the time was opportune . There was little likelihood of any customers walking in at that hour . I was standing beside her , watching the outspread palms and wondering about the old horsehair sofa against the wall on which he sometimes napped . I bent and kissed the still pink neck and suddenly she jumped up , and her two arms encircled me in a bear-like crush . Her mouth , which had been so much in my thoughts , was warm and moist and tender . I heard her murmur , `` We'd better lock the door '' . It did not take me long to slip the bolt securely and return to the rear and its couch . When we opened the door again for business and switched on the lights she said : `` He will not always be indisposed '' . `` I know . I was thinking about that . How will we work it out '' ? ? `` I don't know '' , she said . `` You're the man . You figure it out . I've noticed the way you've been looking at me ever since we met '' . `` I guess we both felt it '' . I said . `` I guess so '' , she said . `` But now what '' ? ? Even as I said it I realized that an education can be invaluable . `` I know what we can do '' , I said . `` Tell him I made a pass at you '' . She raised a protesting hand with a startled air . `` What are you trying to do ? ? Get thrown out ? ? If I even hint at it do you think it will matter that you are his nephew -- and not even a blood nephew '' ? ? `` I don't want to be thrown out and I don't think I will . I think I have a way so we can carry on without his suspecting us '' . `` By telling him you are making passes at me '' ? ? She said incredulously . `` When I was in college '' , I grinned , `` I remember a poem I had to read in my lit class . I don't even remember who wrote it but it was one of those 15th or 16th century poets . In those days poems often told a story in verse and those boys had some corkers to tell ; ; and now I think we can use the knowledge they passed on to us . Tomorrow Mardi Gras opens officially . A lot of people will roam the streets in costumes and masks , and having a ball . There will be romance and flirtation . If you tell him I made a pass at you he might think you misunderstood something I said or did , so instead of just telling him I made a pass , say I tried to date you and that you agreed so you could prove to him what a louse I really am . We made a rendezvous tomorrow evening at nine on some street near Lake Ponchartrain . And to prove what you tell him about me you suggest that he keep the date instead . You are both the same size . He could use your clothes for a costume and a heavy veil for a mask . When I show up he will know you are a good wife to have told him about it '' . `` But you '' -- she began . `` Don't worry about me . It will turn out all right '' . `` I don't understand '' , she insisted . `` Are you trying to cut your throat '' ? ? `` No '' , I chuckled , `` I'm just beginning to collect dividends on my investment in education '' . As we expected , on the following day my Uncle was completely recovered and opened the store as usual at 10 in the morning . I felt that he looked at me coldly and appraisingly and seemed to be uncertain what his attitude towards me should be , but he did not say one word which might indicate that he had been told of advances to his wife . I quit work at my usual hour as if this day was no different from other days . I heard subsequently that my Uncle and Aunt had dinner in a nearby restaurant in the French Quarter after which he went home to get into his costume to keep the date . Shortly before nine I drove my jalopy to the street facing the Lake and parked the car in shadows far enough away from the rendezvous corner but near enough to keep the corner in clear view . A few minutes later I saw my Uncle's car drive up and a woman's figure emerge and walk to the corner . I must say the figure was well made up . If it were not that I knew who it was I could have mistaken it for my Aunt so well did her clothes fit him . In one hand he gripped firmly a parasol though there had been no indication of rain . I suspected why he brought it along . In the half darkness I approached cautiously , making sure he did not see me . He was looking out on the dark waters of the Lake when I came upon him and without wasting words I smacked him hard across the face . `` You cheap bitch '' ! ! I exclaimed . `` You cheap , no good , two-timing bitch ! ! You get a good , loyal husband -- smack ! ! -- and you fall for a pass by his own nephew ! ! You should -- smack ! ! -- be ashamed of yourself . He had better write a postcard to Walter . He opened the myth book again and there ( along the margin next to Robert Graves' imaginative interpretation of the creation of the Dactyls from Rhea's fingertips ) were the names of four Munich bars and Meredith Wilder's address . The bars were marked as Walter had marked them in a small black book kept in a nearly secret drawer . The code , which had probably something to do with sex or some other interest , Nicolas was determined to find out and put to use . A card to Walter would get him an introduction to this Meredith , and that might be good for something . Nicolas called on his muse , a line came back : `` Squaresville , man , and all the palazzos are crummy Palasts '' . That ought to draw a laugh , Nicolas reasoned , as he stored the line away on the wax tape that was his mind . And indeed , his postcard did draw from Walter a letter recommending his friend , the poet Nicolas Manas , to his friend Meredith Wilder . Five days later , on receiving it , Meredith sat drumming his dactyls on his writing table . Dammit ! ! He inwardly cried . His hand was large and square and heavily tanned . The voice crying in him was the voice of guilt . His four weeks in Italy had turned into nearer three months . He had returned to the pension a week ago . Now , he was just in the late poems of Holderlin and therefore had most of the nineteenth century before him -- plus next semester's class preparation . He was determined to spend an industrious summer . Well , maybe Manas wouldn't call . Meredith's fingers slowed and stopped over a line before him : Sie lacheln , die Schwarzen Hexen . The menace of Manas gradually faded as Meredith asked himself should he translate it , ' How the dark fates laughed ' ? ? Or , more rhythmically , ' The swarthy witches are laughing ' ? ? And he missed the point that the swarthy witches might be laughing at him for hoping to escape Nicolas Manas . But Nicolas , too , was being interrupted , that morning . Not by the 11:00 sun which had spread a warmth around his spot of grass in the English Gardens and sent him off to sleep ; ; but by a blond girl in a sweater and skirt who stood a few yards off and tenderly regarded him . Should she wake him ? ? She didn't have the heart . Her heart , her maternal feeling , in fact her being was too busy expressing itself , as quietly thrilled by this sight of her Nicolas curled asleep under a blanket , in a park like a scene from Poussin . She was just not able to break the spell . ( Would she have been able to had she known that the blanket belonged to a young ballet dancer Nicolas had found his first night in one of Walter's marked bars ? ? Nicolas : `` Look , Nicolas doesn't go to bed with boys -- no sex , see ? ? So if all these beers was to get me in bed , man , you just spent a lot of money '' . Ballet dancer : Protests , tears , and `` take what you want , Nicolas , I am a dancer , you are a poet , it is all beautiful '' . To this meek conjugation Nicolas had replied , `` O.K. I can use this blanket . And when you get off this job tonight , well , you can gimme something to eat '' . And , as a matter of fact , Nicolas had slept in the park only part of one night , when he discovered that Munich's early mornings even in summer are laden with dew . He had always known how to find a bed , and on his own terms . He used the blanket for late morning naps when hosts of the night had gone off to jobs and proved reluctant to leave him in their small rooms with their few possessions . Mary Jane Lerner knew none of this . ) Her Nicolas lay curled in the sun like a fawn , black hair falling over his eyes . She was telling herself that this might just be her reward at the end of a long meaningful search for truth . This was surely a reunion in art , it was all that poetry promised . That long night with Nicolas and marijuana in Venice had opened her eyes . His advice , his voice saying his poems , the fact that he had not so much as touched her -- on the contrary , he had put his head back and she had stroked his hair -- this was all new . Her eyes had opened , she had caught a glimpse of a new faith . The next day he was gone . Mary Jane might not be the most intelligent woman , but she was one of the most determined . Even so , it took her several days to force Walter to tell her Nicolas's whereabouts . Packing a small suitcase , informing her husband whom she found in Harry's Bar that she was taking a train to Germany to get away for a while , patting his arm , refusing a drink , getting on the train -- all this had only taken her two hours . She had arrived this morning and come straight to the English Gardens . `` Dear girl '' , Walter had finally said , `` he writes me that he is sleeping in the English Gardens '' . `` How like him '' ! ! Mary Jane had smilingly said . `` His address '' , Walter added , `` is that great foundling home , the American Express . And I will greatly appreciate it if you will not tell your husband . '' For the last half hour Mary Jane had criss-crossed half the length of the Gardens and , at last , come upon her knight . His presence there , asleep in the grass , confirmed all that Mary Jane believed it was in his power to teach her : freedom from the tedium of needs such as hotels , the meaning of nature , how to live , simply , with the angels . She set down her suitcase . Should she wake him ? ? No . Smiling , she sat down on the suitcase and waited and watched . The sun grew hotter as it approached the midday . Nicolas was dreaming he had his head pressed against the dashboard of a speeding car . He began sweating . In his dream he cried , `` Slow down , for Chrissake '' ! ! He half woke and rolled over with his face in the cooler grass . His nose was tickled . He sneezed . He blew his nose expertly between his fingers . He spit . He half sat up and scratched at the hair on his forehead and then , more vigorously , between his legs . He belched , he stretched . Mary Jane got up , quietly , and walked away . Twenty minutes later she was at the desk of the Grafin's pension , her tears dried , signing a hotel form and asking for a bath . Mary Jane belonged to a world acquainted with small attractive hotels and pensions in all the major and minor cities . She had retreated to this world . The Grafin , who was charmed by her , told her , `` Your sister who was here two years ago has quite dark hair . Families are very interesting . Nevertheless , there is no bath . But a young American has a bath next to his room and I shall ask him if you might use it this once . And then we shall see . '' ( The Grafin was partial to the word shall . ) Meredith was irritated when the Grafin knocked at his door and told him , `` She is a great beauty ! ! Shall we allow her not to have a bath ? ? Actually , she is a sad beauty , I believe . You shall see her at dinner '' . Rather erotically he listened to the bath water running ; ; when it stopped he began busily typing , sitting up in a virtuous way . Before dinner , he shaved for the second time that day . A thing he did not like doing , generally . Singing into the mirror and his interested eyes , he was pleased to note , when he stripped for his own bath , that he still had the best part of his Italian sun tan . He flexed his muscles for several minutes , got into the tub , and then grew self-conscious of splashing as he washed . In the small gallery used as the guests' dining room , Meredith sat down at his place and , as always , began teasing the young waitress . He was asking had it been she who left the love note in his sheets ( she also served as maid ) when he saw the Grafin followed by a stately blond girl approaching his table . It would be literary license calculated to glamorize life to say that he , oh , dropped his napkin , so startled was he by Mary Jane's beauty . Yet he did drop his badinage with the ordinary country girl as much in deference to the Grafin as acknowledgement that here , indeed , was something special . Mary Jane had made very little effort . Above a dark green skirt she wore a pale green cashmere sweater with , as he soon perceived , no brassiere beneath . Her white blond hair was clean and brushed long straight down to her shoulders . Perhaps her eyes were larger and more of a summer blue for all they had seen and wept that day . She had touched her face , truly a noble and pure face , only with a lip salve which made her lips glisten but no redder than usual . The result was grace and modesty . As she was rather tired this evening , her simple `` Thank you for the use of your bath '' -- when she sat down opposite him -- spoken in a low voice , came across with coolnesses of intelligence and control . Meredith began falling in love . Soup : `` Only this morning '' ; ; veal cutlets : `` Oh , I couldn't possibly eat all this '' ! ! ; ; Wine : `` Then you were typing poems this afternoon '' ? ? ; ; Fruit compote : `` If you think I would understand it '' ; ; a smile . `` What a beautiful room . Like as if it were built of books '' . Having opened the windows onto the terrace , lit the fire , translated the motto , Meredith grinned and took down a little triplet of books bound together in old calfskin . Opening these he brought out a schnapps bottle and small gold thimble-sized glasses hidden inside it . `` I think the maids tipple in the afternoon '' . `` Those sweet girls ? ? Oh you're joking . It tastes a little like poppyseed . What's 